
THE

PAROCHIAL HISTORY

OF

CORNWALL.




J. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT-STREET.




THE

PAROCHIAL HISTORY

OF

CORNWALL,

FOUNDED ON THE MANUSCRIPT HISTORIES

OF

MR. HALS AND MR. TONKIN;

WITH ADDITIONS AND VARIOUS APPENDICES,

BY

DAVIES GILBERT,

SOMETIME PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY, F.A.S. F.R.S.E. M.R.I.A. &c.
&c. AND D.C.L. BY DIPLOMA FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.

_IN FOUR VOLUMES._

VOL. II.

LONDON:

PUBLISHED BY J. B. NICHOLS AND SON;

AND SOLD BY

J. LIDDELL, BODMIN; J. LAKE, FALMOUTH; O. MATTHEWS, HELSTON; MESSRS.
BRAY AND ROWE, LAUNCESTON; T. VIGURS, PENZANCE; MRS. HEARD, TRURO; W.
H. ROBERTS, EXETER; J. B. ROWE, PLYMOUTH; AND ALL OTHER BOOKSELLERS IN
CORNWALL AND DEVON.

1838.




HISTORY

OF THE

PARISHES OF CORNWALL.




FALMOUTH, ALIAS VAL-MOUTH, ALIAS VALE-MOUTH.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon the north Budock;
east, the haven or harbour of Falmouth; south, the Black Rock and
Pendennis Castle; west, Budock, and the British Channel. For the name,
it is taken from the Vale river’s mouth, which here empties itself
into the British Ocean. And the river itself takes its name from its
original fountain in Roach, under Haynes-burrow, called Pen-ta-Vale,
Fenton, or Venton; that is to say, the head or chief, good or
consecrated, spring or well of water, or river Valley, from thence
called the Vale river. This place, in Cornish, is called Val-genow, or
Fal-genne; in Saxon, Val-mune; in English, Vale-mouth, synonymous
therewith.

This harbour of Falmouth, as mariners tell us, is in all respects the
largest and safest haven for ships that this Island of Britain
affordeth. Its mouth or entrance from the British Ocean, between the
Castles of St. Mawes and Pendennis, situate in St. Anthony and
Falmouth parishes, is about a mile and a half distant, the centre or
middle thereof above a league, from the said mouth or entrance up the
Vale river, by the Rock Island aforesaid, to Carike Road, King’s Road,
and Turner’s Wear, south-east about two leagues from thence, still on
the Vale river, a navigable arm or channel of the said harbour,
extendeth itself up the country, by Trejago Creek and Castle, towards
the incorporate town of Tregony, to the Bridge Place of which it
formerly was navigable. [See CUBY.] And it is overlooked on the
south-east side, by St. Anthony, St. Just, Philley, Ruan Langhorne,
and Cuby parishes. Within the said parishes of St. Just and St.
Anthony are also two navigable creeks or channels. Near the castle and
incorporate town of St. Mawes, (where formerly stood a monastery of
Black Canons Augustine, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, called St. Mary
de Vale, for that it was situated on the Vale harbour or river, as its
superior monastery is from the Plym river, in Devon, called St. Mary
de Plym, whereon it is situate,) from the north-west part of this
harbour of Falmouth, between the parishes of Budock, Gluvias, and
Milor, another navigable channel extendeth itself up the country to
the incorporate town of Penryn. And towards the north another channel
or arm thereof, higher up, extendeth itself through the country from
the centre about a league, and is navigable to Peran Well and Carnan
Bridge. Further up, north-east, another arm or channel of Falmouth
Harbour extends itself to the incorporate and coinage town of Truro,
and the manor of Moris, and is navigable there about nine miles
distance from the Black Rock, or island aforesaid. Lastly, another
branch of this harbour extendeth itself to Tresilian Bridge, where it
is navigable between the parishes of St. Erme, Probus, and Merther,
about ten miles from the mouth of the haven, all which members or
branches of the harbour of Falmouth are overlooked with lofty and
pleasant hills and vales of land, and within the memory of man
abounding with flourishing woods and groves of timber; and before that
time Leland the antiquary, in his Itinerary, tells us that this river
Vale in his days was encompassed about with the loftiest woods, oaks,
and timber-trees that this kingdom afforded temp. Henry VII. and
therefore was by the Britons called Cassi-ter, or Casse-ter, viz. wood
land, from which place and haven the Greeks fetching tin, called it in
their language κασσιτερος, _cassiteros_, stanum, and the island
aforesaid the Cassiteridan Island. But, alas! now this commodity tin
hath made such havock of woods and timber-trees, in searching for and
melting the same, that scarcely any of them are to be seen in those
places; for, the woods and trees being eradicated, the hills and vales
aforesaid have submitted to agriculture, and are made arable lands,
which abound with cattle, sheep, corn, and pastures.

From the premises I suppose it is evident what Mr. Carew, in his
Survey of Cornwall, saith of this harbour of Falmouth, that 100 sail
of ships may lie at anchor within the same, and none of them see the
others main tops, by reason of the steep hills and long windings of
the several channels thereof. In further praise whereof take these
rhymes:

  In the calme south Valubia Harbour stands,
  Where Vale with Sea doth joyne its pure hands,
  ’Twixt whome to shipps commodious port is shewne,
  That makes the riches of the world its owne;
  Ike-ta and Vale, the Britons’ chiefest pride,
  Glory of them, and all the world beside,
  In sendinge round the riches of its tide;
  Greeks and Pheniciens here of old have been,
  Fetchinge from thence furs, hides, pure corne, and tynn,
  Before greate Cæsar fought Cassibelynn.

The parish of Falmouth is a dismembered part of the old parish of
Budock, taxed in the Domesday Roll 1087, and separated from it by
virtue of an Act of Parliament made 15th Charles II. whereby that
church is deprived of its rectory, the great and small tithes, as far
as the boundaries of this new parish extends, on the humble petition
of Sir Peter Killigrew, of Arwinike, Knt. who by his own bounty, and
the charitable benevolence he had begged of others (by leave of the
King and Bishop of Exeter), had built on his own land a church and
cemetery, at the south end of Falmouth town, whereof he was lord and
high lord, for convenience of himself, his servants, and tenants, that
were far off from Budock church. This church, so built, he endowed
with the tithes aforesaid, as a rectory,[1] and so became patron
thereof, or had _jus patronatus_; reserving to himself and his heirs
the right of presenting to the Ordinary a Clerk to be Rector thereof
when the same should become void; and the first Rector, as I take it,
that he presented to this church was Mr. John Bedford. Thus, it is
evident by what ways and means men became patrons of churches, viz.
patronum faciunt dos, ædificatio, fundus; the patrons of churches were
either founders, builders, or benefactors thereof. Jus patronatus est
potestas præsentandi aliquem instituendum ad beneficium ecclesiæ
simplex et vacans. (Statute of Westminster, 13th Edward III.) This
patronage or advowson Sir Peter Killigrew annexed to his manor and
barton of Arwinick.

This church of Falmouth being thus built and endowed, it was
consecrated according to the rights and ceremonies for consecration of
a church in England by Dr. Seth Ward, Lord Bishop of Exeter, 1664.
Within the chancel of which church afterwards was laid, in a vaulted
grave, the dead body of its patron and founder, Sir Peter Killigrew,
Knt. The present incumbent Quarm. Sir Peter Killigrew also gave the
first Rector thereof, and his successors for ever, a house and garden
to dwell in, for profit and pleasure; as also a very rich
pulpit-cloth, with gold fringes, whereon in needlework of gold was
placed the letters I. H. S. Whether it be a contraction of ΙΗΣΟΥΣ
Jesus, or to be construed as being the initial letters of Jesus
Hominum Salvator, or Servator, let others resolve.

Ar-win-ike [I above said is] in this parish, [and signifies] the
beloved still lake, creek, cove, or bosom of waters, according to the
circumstances of the place; on part of which manor formerly stood the
insular island Iktam, or Ictam, of Diodorus Siculus, before mentioned.
Otherwise, if the name of this place be Ar-wynn-ike, it signifies the
victorious or conquering still lake, cove, or busom of waters; perhaps
to be so construed with reference to Pendennis Castle, contiguous
with, and built upon Arwinick lands.

This place is the chief mansion of that ancient and famous family
surnamed de Killy-grewe, Killygreu, or Killy-greue, from a local place
in St. Herme, called Killygrew barton, downs, and hill, now in
possession of Jago in fee, where Henry, the son of Maugan de
Killygrew, held three parts of a knight’s fee of lands, and at
Trewince in Gerance, 3d Henry IV. [according to] Carew’s Survey of
Cornwall, p. 44. Of this family further speaks Mr. Carew, p. 150. The
stock is ancient, and divers of the branches have grown to great
advancement in calling and livelihood by their greater deserts.

Sir John Killigrew, knight, 1571, built the greatest part of the old
house now standing here. He married Wolverston of Wolverston, and had
by her issue John Killigrew, Esq.; that married Monk, who had issue by
her William Killigrew, Esq. created the 585th Baronet of England,
patent 22d December, 12th Charles II. 1660, with limitation to Peter
Killigrew, Esq. son of Sir Peter Killigrew aforesaid, Knt. This Sir
William Killigrew, Bart. by ill conduct wasted his whole paternal
estate, which was valued at about 3,000_l._ per annum; and lastly,
sold this manor and barton of Arwinick to his younger brother, Sir
Peter Killigrew, Knt. aforesaid, who had issue Sir Peter Killigrew,
Bart. aforesaid, who married one of the coheirs of Judge Twysden, and
had issue by her George Killigrew, Esq. that married Ann, daughter of
Sir John Seyntaubyn, Bart. and had issue by her one daughter.

This Mr. George Killigrew was afterwards, in a drunken humour, at a
tavern in Penryn, slain in the chamber, in a duel, by Walter Vincent,
Esq. barrister-at-law, who was tried for his life at Launceston for
the fact, and acquitted by the petty jury, _through bribery and
indirect acts and practices, as was generally said_; yet this Mr.
Vincent, through anguish and horror at this accident, (as it was
said,) within two years after wasted of an extreme atrophy of his
flesh and spirits, that at length at the table whereby he was sitting,
in the Bishop of Exeter’s palace, in presence of divers gentlemen, he
instantly fell back against the wall and died.

Sir Peter Killigrew had issue also two daughters, the one married to
Richard Erisey, Esq. and another married to Martin Lister, Esq. of
Liston, in Staffordshire, a captain or lieutenant in Pendenis Castle,
under John Earl of Bath; upon whose issue by her Sir Peter settled
much of his lands, on condition he should assume the name of
Killigrew, and is now in possession of this lordship.

The country people here about will tell you, (as such are
superstitious enough to do,) that this murder or manslaughter of Mr.
Killigrew by Mr. Vincent, whereby the male line of that family is
extinct, was a just judgment of God; for that Jane Killigrew, widow of
Sir John Killigrew, Knt. aforesaid, his great-grandmother, in the
Spanish wars in the latter end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, went
on board two Dutch ships of the Hans Towns, (always free traders in
times of war,) driven into Falmouth Harbour by cross winds, laden with
merchandize, on account (as was said) of Spaniards, and with a
numerous party of ruffians, murdered the two Spanish merchants or
factors on board those ships, and took from them two barrels or
hogsheads of Spanish pieces of eight, and converted them to her own
use.

Now, though Fleta, Liber 1. chap. iii. temp. Edward II. tells us that
it is no murder except it be proved that the party slain was English,
and no stranger, yet afterwards, by the Statute 4 Edward III. his son,
chap. 4, the killing any _foreigner under the King’s protection_, out
of evil design or malice, is made murder, upon which Statute those
offenders were tried and found guilty at Launceston of wilful murder,
both by the grand and petty juries, and had sentence of death passed
accordingly upon them, and were all executed, except the said Lady
Killigrew, the principal agent and contriver of the barbarous fact,
who, by the interest and favour of Sir John Arundell, of Tolverne,
Knt. and his son-in-law, Sir Nicholas Hals, of Pengersick, Knt.
obtained of Queen Elizabeth a pardon or reprieve for the said lady,
which was seasonably put into the Sheriff of Cornwall’s hands.

This Lady Jane Killigrew afterwards gave a silver cup to the Mayors of
Penryn for ever, in memory of some kindness in her troubles received
in that Corporation, 1612. Sir Henry Killigrew, Knt. temp. Elizabeth,
was a younger brother to Sir John Killigrew aforesaid, and followed
the Court for advantage, and to raise his fortunes (according to the
constant genius of his family). He, as Mr. Carew in his Survey of
Cornwall saith, “after embassies and messages, and many other
profitable employments, both of peace and war, in his prince’s
service, to the good of his country, hath made choice of a retired
estate, and was reverently regarded by all sorts, and places his
principal contentment in himself; which to a life so well acted can no
wise be wanting.” He married Katherine, daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke,
of Giddy Hall, in Essex, Knt. who had issue by her a daughter, married
to Sir Jonathan Trelawny, of Poble, Knt.

This Sir Henry Killigrew, by the favour of Queen Elizabeth, as a boon
procured Gervase Babington, Lord Bishop of Exeter, 1594, by lease and
release, fine and recovery, to dismember from the church and bishopric
of Exeter, the great manor, barton, and lordship of Kirton, in Devon,
worth 1,000_l._ per annum, rents of assize, which had been in the
possession of the Bishops of Kirton and Exeter, from the time of
Edulphus, the first Bishop thereof, anno Dom. 907, being 687 years to
that time; but long since this manor of land is gone out of the name
and possession of Killigrew. In like manner, about that time John
Coldwell, Lord Bishop of Salisbury, passed the manor of Sherburne to
the Crown, by whom it was given to Sir Walter Ralegh, Knt. which is
also long since gone out of his name and family.

The arms of Killigrew are, within a field Argent, an imperial eagle
with two necks, within a bordure Bezanté Sable. Which arms and bordure
seem to inform us that this family was indirectly descended from
Richard Earl of Cornwall, King of the Romans, by that concubine Jane
de Valletorta, widow of Sir Alexander Oakeston [see ST. STEPHEN’S BY
SALTASH]. For that, as this bordure Bezanté Sable was the proper arms
of Richard Earl of Cornwall, viz. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, the imperial eagle
was the cognizance of the said Earl of Cornwall as King of the Romans.

Within this parish also now stands the borough town of Falmouth, which
compound word is etymologized before. It was incorporated 14th Charles
II. by the name of the Mayor and Aldermen and Magistrates of the
Borough of Falmouth, with the jurisdiction of a Court-leet, wherein
plea of debt and damage is tried within its precincts. But, alas!
notwithstanding its present grandeur, neither this town nor its modern
name is of any great antiquity, neither being extant 500 years past;
for long since that time it was known by no other appellation than
that of Smith-ike, that is, the Smith’s creek, leat, or bosom of
waters, from a smith that lived at the creek, or cove, now in the
centre thereof. And verily, I have been told by some aged persons
lately living, that they remembered not above five houses standing in
this place; though now, I suppose, they are increased to five or six
hundred. And for its name Falmouth, it was not recorded till, at the
request of Sir Peter Killigrew, it was inserted in its charter of
incorporation as aforesaid. Which thing I do not mention to disparage
this really good name, but to let the inhabitants of this place, and
many other families now flourishing in Cornwall, know that many of
them are mistaken in their antiquity and former appellations, if truly
examined.

Moreover, concerning the first buildings of this town by John
Killigrew, Esq. In 1613, happened a notable controversy between him
and the Corporations of Penryn, Truro, and Helston, which suggested,
by a petition to James the First, promoted and backed by the interest
of the Burgesses thereof, viz. Sir Richard Robartes, Bart. and John
Arundell, Esq. for Truro; Sir Francis Godolphin, Knt. for Helston;
Richard Penwarne, Esq. for Penryn; and others, “that the erecting of a
town at Smith-ike would tend to the ruin and impoverishing of the
ancient coinage-towns and market-towns aforesaid, not far distant from
thence; and therefore humbly prayed the King’s Majesty that the
buildings and undertakings of Mr. Killigrew might be inhibited for the
future.” Who, upon receipt and hearing of this petition in Council,
ordered the Lords thereof, Egerton, Buckhurst, Hume, Marre, Sir Robert
Cecil, Principal Secretary of State, and others, to write to Sir
Nicholas Hals, of Fentongollon, Knt. then Governor of Pendennis
Castle, to be better informed of the true merits of this case, and to
know his own particular sentiments about it. Which gentleman, as soon
as he received this letter, made answer, that he well approved of Mr.
Killigrew’s project for building a town and custom-house at Smith-ike,
as being near the mouth of the harbour of Falmouth; and briefly,
amongst many others, for these reasons especially:

1. For the quick and necessary supply of such ships whose occasions,
or contrary winds, brought them in there, without being obliged (as
then they were) to go up two miles the river to Penryn, or nine miles
to Truro, in order thereto, or to take in and out their cargoes or
lading, and make entries at the custom-houses at such distance, by
reason of which delays of time they many times lost the opportunity of
a fair wind to prosecute their intended voyages, longer than was for
their advantage.

2. For the speedy supplying or reinforcing the Castle of Pendennis,
contiguous therewith, with men, ammunition, and provisions, in case of
any enemy’s sudden invasion, or endeavouring to take the same by storm
or surprise, before the country militia could be raised, or recruits
brought in for that purpose.

3. For that other castles for the same reasons were built near towns,
or towns erected near them, as Dover, Portsmouth, Plymouth, Newcastle,
Gravesend, and many more.”

As appears more at large from the letters and reasons of Sir Nicholas
Hals to the Lords of the Council aforesaid, whereof, by fees to the
Clerk of the Council, or Secretary of State, copies were privately
taken forth, at the special instance and request of the said Richard
Penwarne, and other Members of Parliament then in London, who
transmitted them, by the hands of Mr. Anthony Mundye, to the
Corporation aforesaid, where the writer of these lines hath had a full
view of them, amongst the papers and records of the borough of Penryn,
then lodged in the chest of its town-hall. Whereupon King James, upon
a full hearing of this controverted matter between the parties
aforesaid, and what could be alleged on either part, gave his opinion
(with which all the Council agreed) that the erecting a town at
Smith-ike by Mr. Killigrew, could in no sense be prejudicial to the
coinage and incorporate towns aforesaid, they standing at such
considerable distances from it; but especially for that every man
might lawfully do what he would for the utility and advantage of his
own proper goods or lands, without the licence or approbation even of
the King, or any contiguous neighbour, who had no public or private
nuisance thereby done him: how much more reasonable was it, therefore,
when the owners of such lands converted them to such uses as tended
not only to his own, but the public good and advantage of the king and
country together.

Whereupon Mr. Killigrew proceeded with his intended buildings, and his
tenants, the inhabitants thereof, quickly grew rich by trade and
merchandize both at home and abroad: so that in about twenty years’
time the town became notably famous in respect thereof, and is now,
for wealth, trade, and buildings, scarcely inferior to any town in
Cornwall. It is privileged also with a weekly market on Thursdays, and
with fairs upon July 27 and October 30. The chief inhabitants of this
town are Mr. Russell, Mr. Tresahar, Mr. Corker, Mr. Hill, Mr. Gwyn.

In this town his Majesty hath his custom-house collector, comptroller,
customer, surveyor, sea and land waiters; and from this town the
packet-boats from the Groyne, Lisbon, and America, receive their
despatches from their agent, to the great advantage of this place in
times of peace and war: since, as I am informed, removed to Flushing,
in Mylor parish, opposite thereto.

This town also was the honorary title of Charles Lord Berkeley,
Viscount Fitzhardinge, created Lord Bottetourt and Earl of Falmouth,
17th March, 16th Charles II. 1664. He was slain in the Dutch wars
1665, without legitimate issue, and gave for his arms, Gules, a
chevron Ermine, between ten crosses patée, 6 and 4, Argent.

Afterwards it became the honorary title of George Fitz-Roy, third son
of Barbara Duchess of Cleveland by King Charles the Second, by whom he
was created Earl of Northumberland, Viscount Falmouth, and Baron
Pontefract in Yorkshire; and giveth for his arms, the imperial shield
of England, with a baton sinister, gobonée, Ermine and Azure. This
Barbara Villiers was one of the daughters of the Lord Viscount
Grandison, of the Kingdom of Ireland, and was married to Roger Palmer,
Esq. created Earl of Castlemaine, in Ireland; but afterwards, when
Charles the Second took a liking to this Countess, he sent the Earl
her husband, with his own good liking, Governor of a Castle and Colony
of the English at Surat, in the East Indies. His lady King Charles
further created Countess of Southampton and Duchess of Cleveland,
during life. After the death of George Fitz-Roy, in the year 1722,
Hugh Boscawen, of Tregothnan, Esq. Lord Warden of the Stannaries, was
created by King George, Lord Boscawen of Tregothnan, Baron Boscawen of
Boscawen Ros, in Burian, and Viscount Falmouth.

In this parish, on the lands of the manor of Arwynick (the Icta and
Island of Diodorus Siculus aforesaid), upon a lofty peninsula or
promontory of land, stands the famous and impregnable Castle of
Pendennis, for which the Crown pays annually to the lord of the manor
aforesaid, out of the Exchequer, about 13_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._ rent, as I
take it. For the compound name Pen-den-is Castle, it is British, and
signifies that it is the head or chief man’s castle, viz. the King or
Earl of Cornwall. Otherwise, if the true name thereof be Pen-dun-es
Castle, it signifies that it is the head or chief fort or fortress
castle. This castle of old consisted only of a treble intrenchment of
turf, earth, and stones, after the British and Roman manner, upon the
top of the highest hill in those parts, abutting upon the west side of
the mouth or entrance of the harbour of Falmouth, and containeth about
twenty statute acres of ground within the lines. Repaired and
indifferently fortified by Henry the Eighth, in the latter end of his
reign, in the French war, with allowance of a petty garrison, whose
daughter, Queen Elizabeth, in her Spanish wars, raised the new fort,
and bettered the old fortification, as they are now extant; so that it
is looked upon as one of the most invincible castles in this kingdom,
having had in it above one hundred pieces of cannon mounted, and some
thousands of foot arms. After Queen Elizabeth had thus fortified and
munified the Castle of Pendennis, she placed therein a band of 100
soldiers, and over them placed as her Governor Sir Nicholas Parker,
Knt. (a Devonshire gentleman, as some say, though his arms, a fess
fretty or chequey,[2] differs from the arms of Parker of Burrington,)
of whom thus speaks Mr. Carew in his Cornish Survey, p. 150: “He now
demeaneth himself no less kindly and frankly towards his neighbours
for the present, than he did resolutely and valiantly against his
enemies when he followed the wars, where-through he commandeth not
only their bodies by his authority, but also their hearts by his love,
to live and die in his assistance, for their common preservation and
her Highness’ service.” He died without issue, anno Dom. 1608, and
lies buried in Budock church. His successor in the government of this
castle was Sir Nicholas Hals, of Fentongollan, Knt. (a domestic
servant to Prince Henry, eldest son of James the First,) son of John
Hals, of Efford, Esq. in Devon, who died Governor thereof in 1637; and
was succeeded in that dominion by Sir Nicholas Slanning, of Marstow,
in Devon, Knt. who was slain on the part of his master Charles the
First against the Parliament army at the battle of Bristol, 6th July,
1643. After his death his widow (daughter of Sir James Baggs, of
Plymouth, Knt.) was married to Richard Arundell, of Trerice, Esq. son
of John Arundell, of that place, Esq. commonly called John of Tilbury,
for that he was an officer under Queen Elizabeth when she was encamped
there with her army, in expectation of the Spaniards landing, 1588.

Which gentleman, (John Arundell,) was by Charles the First made
Governor of Pendennis Castle; during whose command there happened a
tragical siege thereof by the Parliament army under Colonel Fortescue;
wherein the besiegers and the besieged showed unparalleled valour and
conduct for about six months’ space, when at length it was surrendered
upon honourable conditions, the soldiers going forth with their arms
mounted and colours flying, more consumed with sickness and famine
within the walls than destroyed by their enemies from without, having
been driven to that extremity that the governor, soldiers, and many
other gentlemen and ladies therein, were forced for some time to eat
horseflesh, for want of other victuals; as being hemmed in by the
Parliament frigates at sea on the one side, and surrounded with their
army at land on the other, so that no relief of men or provisions
could be brought into the garrison, whereby it was forced to
capitulate and surrender as aforesaid 1647, (before which time all
other castles in England, except Ragland in Wales, were yielded up to
the Parliament,) and the hunger-starved soldiers of Pendennis, that
came out thence, feeding too freely on victuals and drink, brought
themselves into incurable diseases, whereof many died; so that here,
as in many other places, it was observed that more men and women died
by two frequently putting their hands to their mouths, than by
clapping their hands to their swords; as the Jews did on surrender of
Jerusalem to the Romans, after the siege and famine there.

After the surrender of this castle, as aforesaid, by Colonel John
Arundell, he was succeeded in that dignity by Colonel Fortescue, and
he was succeeded by Captain Fox; as after the restoration of Charles
the Second, Fox was succeeded by Richard Lord Arundell, and he by the
Earl of Bath.

One Mr. Thomas Killigrew, of this Arwinick family, was Jester or
Master of the Revels to Charles the Second, who, (to give but a single
instance of his wit and humour,) having been at Paris on business,
went to Versailles to see the French Court for diversion; where, being
well known to many French courtiers who had been in England, he was by
them introduced into Louis the Fourteenth the King of France’s
presence, who had a long time had a desire to see him whom fame
reported the wittiest man in England. But at that time Killigrew was
politically out of humour, and spoke very little, out of a desire he
had to hear the wisdom of the French Court, and what little discourse
he had it was trivial and of no consequence; whereupon King Louis told
the noblemen that gave him such encomiums of his wit, that he looked
upon him as a very dull fellow. Whereupon the courtiers told him,
notwithstanding what his Majesty’s opinion was, assuredly he was a
most ingenious and witty man. Whereupon, soon after, the King resolved
to make a further trial of him, and therefore led him into a long
gallery, where were many fine pictures, and asked Killigrew what they
were? And amongst the rest of those draughts showed the picture of our
Saviour upon the Cross; and then again asked Killigrew if he knew what
it was? To which, as to the former demands, he pleaded ignorance, and
answered, “No.” “Why, then,” said King Louis, “Monsieur Killigrew, “I
will tell you what they are. The picture in the centre is the draught
of our Saviour on the Cross, and that on the right hand of him is the
Pope’s picture, and that on the left hand of him is my own.” To which
Killigrew replied, “I humbly thank your Majesty for the information
you have given me, for though I have often heard that our Saviour was
crucified between two thieves, yet I never knew who they were till
now.” Which sharp repartee convinced that King of his wrong opinion of
Killigrew’s wit in satire and ridicule, especially it being at the
time when the Pope and French King grievously persecuted the French
Protestants, and either dragooned them to mass or drove them out of
France.

Mr. Thomas Killigrew is further said to have put under the candlestick
where Charles the Second supped, five small papers, on which he had
written the word ALL. The King, on sight thereof, asked him what he
meant by these five words of one signification. “Your Majesty’s pardon
granted, I will tell you, sir,” said Mr. Killigrew; which being
promised, he said, “The first All signified that the Country had sent
all; the second, the City had lent all; the third, that the Court had
spent all; the fourth, if we did not mend all; the fifth, that it will
be worse for us all.”

This was reflected on the royal family of William the Third, “That he
was William Think-all; his Queen Mary, Mary Take-all; Prince George of
Denmark, George Drink-all; and the Princess Ann, Ann Eat-all, which
ill habit diminished her health and hastened her death.”


TONKIN.

Sir Henry Killigrew, Knt. married Katherine, the second daughter and
coheir of Sir Anthony Cooke, of Giddy Hall, in Essex. Her other
sisters married Sir William Cecil, Lord Treasurer, Sir Nicholas Bacon,
Lord Chancellor, Sir Thomas Hobby, and Sir Ralph Howlet, Knts. Which
ladies were all accounted of the most learned in the kingdom,
eminently skilled in the Latin and Greek tongues. To give an instance
for the whole:

Sir Henry Killigrew being appointed by Queen Elizabeth, ambassador to
Henry the Fourth of France, lately turned Papist, was not very fond of
that employment, and would have excused himself, but knew not how:
whereupon his lady wrote a letter to her sister Mildred, wife to Sir
William Cecil, to try her interest with his lordship to get the Queen
to excuse him, and that some other person might be appointed for that
employment. The letter was these words:

  Si mihi quem cupio cures, Mildreda! remitti,
    Tu mihi, tu melior, tu mihi sola soror;
  Sin male cunctando retines, vel trans mare mittes,
    Tu mala, tu pejor, tu mihi nulla soror:
  It si Cornubiam, tibi pax sit, et omnia læta,
    Sin mare――Cœcile! nuncio bella.――Vale!

Which I find thus translated by Dr. Fuller, in his Worthies, though
much abated of their elegancy in Latin:

  If, Mildred! by thy care he be sent back, whom I request.
    A sister good thou art to me, yea better, yea the best;
  But if with stays thou keep’st him still, or send’st where seas may part,
    Then unto me a sister ill, yea worse, yea none thou art;
  If go to Cornwall he shall please, I peace to thee foretell;
    But, Cecil! if he set to seas――I war denounce.――Farewell!

Whether this letter did procure Sir Henry Killigrew’s stay, and
dismission from the intended service, I am unable to resolve, although
well assured I am that his daughter by this Catherine Cooke was
married to Sir Jonathan Trelawney, of Poole, Knt. Sheriff of Cornwall
36th Eliz.

As for the harbour itself, it is agreed by all mariners to be one of
the best for safe anchorage, large circumference, and good riding for
ships, that this kingdom affords. The mouth or entrance, between the
castles of Pendennis and St. Mawes, is about two miles over. The body
of the harbour, from St. Mawes to Falmouth town, is about a league.
From Falmouth to Turner’s Weare, upon the river Vale, two leagues;
from whence an arm of it goes up towards Tregony, another towards
Tresilian Bridge, a third towards Truro; all which places the salt
water visits every tide. Beneath Turner’s Weare, on the north, another
channel goes by Restrongar Passage to Carnen, and St. Perron
Arworthal. From Falmouth town goeth up another creek to Penryn.
Lastly, on the south there go into the country two creeks towards St.
Mawes and St. Anthony. All these members or branches of the harbour
are overlooked by lofty and pleasant hills, and are supplied with deep
water, so that boats, ships, barges, and lighters every day, one where
or another, carry and recarry goods and merchandizes to the remotest
parts thereof. Hence it is that Mr. Carew says, “a hundred sail of
ships may lie at anchor within the harbour of Falmouth, and none of
them see the other’s topmast,” because of the steep hills and windings
of the river.

The Killigrews are also lords of the land whereon the Castle of
Pendennis stands, and receive yearly out of the Exchequer for the same
13_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._ Of all which premises take the following rhyme:

  In the calm south great Falmouth’s Harbour stands,
  Where Vale with Sea doth join its peaceful hands;
  ’Twixt whom to ships commodious port is shown,
  That makes the riches of the world its own.
  Falmouth, or Vale, the Britons’ chiefest pride,
  Glory of them and all the world beside,
  In sending round the treasures of her tide,
  Killigrew’s the Lord both of the Fort and Town:
  Speak these the rest, to make them better known.

Arwinick signifies upon the marsh; ar being the same as war, upon, and
winick, a marsh, exactly suitable to the situation of the place.

Sir John Killigrew, of this place, ought not to be forgotten; who,
seeing the Parliament Army to prevail every where, with his own hands
set fire to his noble house here, that they might not find shelter in
it when they came to lay siege to Pendennis Castle, as they did soon
after: an action which was well rewarded by Charles the Second;
although the house hath not been rebuilt, a few rooms only having been
fitted up just to receive the family, who have not much resided in it
ever since.


THE EDITOR.

Falmouth Harbour, situated within thirty miles of the Land’s End, is
without all comparison the most advantageous station for packets,
maintaining a regular communication with Lisbon, the West Indies, and
the Mediterranean. It has also been found admirably adapted for
receiving smaller ships of war; a squadron of frigates, under the
command of Admiral Lord Hugh Seymour, of Admiral Pellew, &c. cruised
from hence against the French during a part of the great contest
following the Revolution; but, although the largest ship may enter the
port, and anchor there in safety, yet it is very inferior for their
accommodation either to Plymouth or to Portsmouth.

Falmouth is also a great resort of vessels coming from foreign
countries, to receive orders as to their ultimate destination; and
this is not only owing to the western situation of the harbour, but,
in a very considerable degree, to the residence of a family which has
maintained the highest reputation through a long series of years, as
merchants, as men of integrity and of talent. They are said to be
lineal or collateral relatives of the patriarch George Fox. On their
first arrival in Cornwall, this family settled themselves at Par, near
St. Austell; but afterwards removing to Falmouth, they have mainly
contributed towards the prosperity of the whole county, as merchants,
as manufacturers, as spirited and enlightened adventurers in mines,
and in the fisheries. Among many so eminent, it would be absolute
injustice not to mention particularly Mr. Robert Ware Fox, who has
most successfully employed his leisure in the philosophical
investigation of geology and of chemistry, in connexion with
mechanics, not only by his own exertions, but as the judicious and
liberal encourager of similar pursuits in others.

Many individuals have acquired wealth in Falmouth by a very peculiar
species of commerce, carried on with Lisbon by means of the packets.
The interchange of various commodities was legally prohibited, but at
the same time practically allowed, by both Governments; and to such an
extent did this half-contraband trade arise, that a Mr. Nowell, who
kept a retail shop at Falmouth, is said to have made a fortune, by
which his son became Sheriff of the county in 1787, chiefly as a
carrier of these goods to and from London on packhorses; and a fortune
still larger has been made by Mr. Russell, of Exeter, by conveying
increased quantities in waggons over improved roads, through
Devonshire and Cornwall.

It is quite impossible for such an harbour as Falmouth to have escaped
the knowledge of the Phœnicians, when they came to Cornwall for tin,
and strangely mistook it for a cluster of islands. The Greeks must
also have known this port; and the Romans not merely encamped in
various parts of the county, but having fixed stations within it, and
on the very banks of the Fall, cannot have failed of noticing the
longest and best roadsted and navigable river within the limits of
Cornwall: but so vague and uncertain are all the descriptions
transmitted to us either by geographers or by the writers of
itineraries, that we are utterly unable to discriminate most places
within certain limits of each other except by conjecture. It is truly
a matter of astonishment that nations having made such ample progress
in abstract geometry, and in astronomy itself, should have altogether
disregarded latitudes which were within their reach; and even
approximations towards longitudes, which might have been obtained
through the medium of lunar eclipses.

Various names derived from ancient authors have been applied to
Falmouth. VALUBA is the one most commonly received. The Ocrinum
promontory being taken for the Lizard, and Bolerium for the Land’s
End.

The late Sir Christopher Hawkins seems to have established, with the
full degree of certainty applicable to such subjects, that the ICTIS
of Diodorus Siculus must have been St. Michael’s Mount, and not the
hill occupied by Pendennis Castle.

The British name of Falmouth was Smithick. The last syllable, ick, has
doubtlessly some reference to water.

The few houses standing at Smithick before Mr. Killigrew built the new
town, are said to have been called Pen-y-cum-quick; and an idle story
is related of some old woman having brewed ale for a public meeting,
and having apologized to the people when they assembled for all her
stock being gone, by stating that foreign sailors coming to her house
drunk the whole, and that “Pennies came so quick” she could not resist
the temptation for parting with it.

But the Right Hon. Charles Williams Wynn, M.P. for Denbighshire, has
informed me that Pen-y-cwm-cuick is, in good Welch, the head of the
contracted valley or dingle. Cuch signifies contracted, or knit
together, as knitting the brows. This corresponds with the valley
going up from the strand by the new market-house. Sir George Clark’s
seat, near Edinburgh, situated in a similar manner in respect to a
narrow vale, is written Pen-y-cuick, and pronounced Pennyquick, the
Celtic PEN-Y being always corrupted by Saxon lips into penny; as
Pen-y-darran, on the Taff.

The church at Falmouth is dedicated to King Charles the First, with
the proud additions of Saint and Martyr. It evidently suited with the
views and with the interest of those in power after 1660, to identify
Charles the First with the Established Church, and to inculcate that
he died in its defence. The new church at Plymouth is dedicated in a
similar manner to St. Charles; and in this instance the pleasure of
outraging the feelings of their adversaries may have acted in aid of
political expediency.

Mr. Hals does not seem to have treated the very distinguished family
of Killigrew in a manner that might have been expected, from his
attachment to aristocracy in general, or from his prejudices as a
Cavalier. The horrible story of Jane Killigrew cannot possibly be
true, in the manner or to the extent in which it is related, and the
whole should have been omitted, were there not reasons for believing
that it rests on some foundation.

If the lady is exonerated from the most atrocious part of the tale,
representing her as actually boarding the vessels and participating in
the destruction of foreign merchants, and for which mere popular
tradition at the interval of two centuries cannot form an adequate
proof, we must not too rigidly apply the manners and feelings of our
own times to a period so dissimilar. Many exploits performed by the
great Sir Francis Drake, would now create very different impressions
from those stamped on men’s minds at the time; and the more gentle and
courteous, though not less brave, Sir Walter Raleigh, would now hardly
escape without blame.

No one seems to have suffered greater degradation, from common report,
than Mr. Thomas Killigrew. He is usually represented as the Jester, or
even licensed fool, of Charles the Second; and the anecdotes given by
Mr. Hals contain much more of rudeness than of wit.

His history is thus related in the Biographical Dictionary of 1784:

“THOMAS KILLIGREW, descended from the ancient Cornish family of that
name, was a younger son of Sir Robert Killigrew, and born in 1611. He
was distinguished by uncommon abilities. He was page of honour to King
Charles the First, and groom of the bedchamber to King Charles the
Second, with whom he had suffered many years of exile. During his
abode beyond the sea, he took a view of France, Italy, and Spain, and
was honoured by his Majesty with the employment of Resident at the
State of Venice. In his absence from this country he applied his
leisure hours to poetry, and to the composition of several plays, of
which Sir John Denham takes notice in his poem on our author’s return
from his embassy. Though Denham mentions but six, our author wrote
nine plays in his travels, and two at London; all which were printed,
with his picture before them, in 1664. There is, besides, “A Letter
concerning some Nuns in the Nunnery of Tours,” dated from Orleans in
1635, and printed in three folio sheets. Mr. Killigrew died in 1682,
and was buried in Westminster Abbey. He had been twice married.

“He was a man of a very droll and uncommon vein of humour, with which
he used to divert that merry monarch Charles the Second; who on that
account was fonder of him than his best Ministers, and would give him
access to his person when he denied it to them. It was usually said of
him, that when he attempted to write he was nothing near so smart as
he was in conversation: which was just the reverse of Cowley, who
shone but little in conversation, although he excelled so much with
his pen. Hence Denham, who knew them both, has taken occasion thus to
characterize their respective excellences and defects:

  “Had Cowley ne’er spoke, Killigrew ne’er writ,
   Combin’d in one, they’d make a matchless wit.”

Another brother, Henry Killigrew, is mentioned in the same work,
Chaplain to James the Second while he was Duke of York, and a
Prebendary of Westminster. He is there stated to have written a
tragedy at the age of seventeen, called “The Conspiracy,” which
obtained the high approbation of Ben Jonson.

He had a daughter, Ann Killigrew, recorded as

  A Grace for beauty, and a Muse for wit.

This young lady was maid of honour to the Duchess of York, but died of
the smallpox at the early age of twenty-five.

The elder brother, William, was also a poet and an author. The
representative of the Killigrew family is Lord Wodehouse, in right of
his late wife, Sophia Berkeley, niece of Lord Berkeley of Stratton.

Falmouth has now outgrown the property of those who originally built
the town, and is extended northward, at Green Bank, into the land of
Lord de Dunstanville, where the houses have all the convenience and
decoration suited to modern times. The older part of Falmouth,
although it dates no further back than about two centuries, is
unfortunately distinguished by its narrow, crooked streets, and by
every defect usually found in the smallest fishing-towns. It is,
however, surrounded by beautiful villas.

Falmouth has been associated, in 1832, with Penryn, in the privilege
of sending two Members to Parliament.

  This parish measures 621 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815
      The parish                           10,029    0    0
      The town                             11,534    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           569    1    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
       Parish {   1165   |   1374   |   1982   |   2523
       Town   {   3684   |   3933   |   4392   |   4761
                  ----       ----       ----       ----
          Total   4849       5307       6374       7284
  giving an increase on the population of the parish of 116 per cent.,
    on the population of the town 29 per cent., in 30 years; on both
    together 50 per cent. in the same period.

The latitude of Falmouth is given in the best tables at 50° 8′. The
longitude has been ascertained by Dr. Tiarks with the greatest care
(see Philosophical Transactions for 1824): the flag-staff at Pendennis
Castle 20ᵐ. 11.5ˢ. west. Times of high water at the new and full moon
51ʰ. 15′.

Present Rector, the Hon. and Rev. W. Wodehouse, instituted 1828.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Hornblende rocks, both schistose and compact, such as occur near the
junction of the porphyritic and calcareous series, constitute this
little parish. The Castle Hill appears to belong to the latter series.


     [1] The Mayor of Falmouth, by Act of Parliament, pays yearly
     at Michaelmas three pounds to the Vicar of Budock, for the
     small tithes.

     [2] The arms of Parker of Rathon, in Sussex, were, Azure,
     fretty Or, over all a fess of the Second. And in the
     pedigree of that family Sir Nicholas Parker, Knt. is styled
     Captain of Pendennis Castle, Cornwall. EDIT.




ST. FEOCK.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and has upon the north St. Kea,
east and south the harbour of Falmouth towards the Vale river, west
Restrongat creek, or Carnan river. As for the name Feock, or Feighe,
Veage, Feage, it signifies the top of a house, or high mountain, as
this parish is on, and there is still extant the lofty local place
called Le Feock, Le Feage. At the time of the Domesday Tax, 20th
William I. (1087), this parish was taxed by the name of Ros-carnon,
now part thereof. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester into the value of Cornish Benefices, Ecclesia de Sancto
Feoko was valued xl_s._ in Decanatu de Powdre; Vicar ejusdem xiii_s._
iiii_d._; in Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, and Valor Beneficiorum, the
Vicarage of Feock was valued in 11_l._; the patronage in the Bishop of
Exeter, who endowed it. The incumbent Ange; and the parish rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 126_l._ 12_s._

St. Feock, the presidual guardian of this church, in all probability
lived at the local place aforesaid, called Le-Feock, i. e. Feock’s
place and dwelling; but who or what his parents were, when or where
born, &c. I must plead _non sum informatus_.

In the glass windows is the figure of a man in priest’s robes, with a
radiated or shining circle about his head and face, and under his feet
written ST. FEOCK; beneath whom, also in the glass, were painted,
kneeling and bending forward, in way of adoration, the figures of a
man and woman, and behind them several children, out of which
figurative man and woman’s mouths proceeded a label, with this
inscription――“Sancte Feock, ora pro bono statu S. Trewonwoll et
Elionoræ uxoris ejus.” From whence I was fully satisfied that he was
indeed the tutelar guardian of this church.

At Le-Feock aforesaid, temp. Charles II. was the dwelling, by lease,
of Captain Thomas Penrose, whose father married Verman; originally
descended from the Penroses of Penrose in Sythney. This gentleman
having in his youth, temp. Charles I. been bred at sea, in the study
and practice of the art of navigation, it appears from his journal
that, in the year 1650, he was by the Admiral of the States of England
made Captain or Commander of the Bristol frigate or man-of-war, in
which he fought, together with the English fleet under command of
General Blake, near Dover, against the Dutch fleet, under their
General Van Tromp, who was shrewdly worsted by Blake. He was also in
the engagement against the Dutch fleet under Sir George Ayscough,
1652, before Plymouth, where the victory inclined to neither side, but
great losses on both. He also, 28th of October, the same year, fought
in General Blake’s squadron against the General of the States De Witt,
who was then worsted, on one side of the North Foreland, in the Downs.
Captain Penrose was also in that engagement between General Blake and
Van Tromp wherein the English Fleet was worsted, and came off with
great loss, so that Van Tromp sailed into the Downs in great triumph,
with a broom on his main-topmast.

But, maugre his success, pride, and insolence, the States of England
fitted forth their shattered ships sooner than was expected, to the
number of eighty sail of men-of-war, when Captain Penrose was removed
from the Bristol to the command of the Maidstone frigate. Then also
were Penn and Burne discharged from command of particular squadrons,
and the supreme command of the fleet was put into the hands of General
Blake, General Monk, and General Dean; when soon after happened that
bloody and tremendous sea-fight betwixt the English and the Dutch
fleets, before Weymouth and Dungeness, wherein General Monk declared
(upon the sudden death of General Dean, killed at breakfast on the
deck of their ship by Monk’s side, with a defiance gun-bullet shot at
random by the Dutch to his destruction) that this fifth battle should
put an end to the war one way or other, and gave forth strict order
and command to the officers of the English fleet upon penalty of
death, that they should neither take from nor give quarter to the
enemy; which commands in the engagement being for a considerable time
kept and observed by the English, the terror thereof so amazed the
Dutch, that, after great losses of men and ships by them sustained,
they declined to fight, and bore or ran away with their fleet, leaving
the victory and British Channel wholly to the English fleet. In this
fight, as appears from Penrose’s Journal, he lost above fifty men out
of the Maidstone, besides had many more wounded. Afterwards the
English fleet, coasting westwards in pursuit of the vanquished Dutch
fleet, were by cross winds forced into Falmouth harbour, where also
for some days, as appears from Penrose’s Journal aforesaid, he
entertained at his house in this place of Le-Feock (opposite the
harbour aforesaid) General Monk, General Blake, Sir George Ayscough,
and many other officers and gentlemen of the fleet, to good content
and satisfaction.

Afterwards they sent him many letters concerning the war, fleet, and
ship he sailed in, and the course he should take; and in particular,
amongst others, thanked him for his great valour and conduct in the
several engagements aforesaid. From some of which it appears General
Blake was a better soldier than scholar, as being very badly able to
write the letters of his name to the letters his secretary had formed,
as yet may be seen; which is not to be wondered at, as I am credibly
informed he was at first but a man of no higher education than that of
a petty mechanic, viz. a ribbon and galloon weaver in Taunton;
whereof, at last, for his valour in the siege, in opposition to
Charles the First, he was made governor thereof by the Parliament.

Captain Penrose fought also in the Maidstone frigate under General
Monk, in the sixth and last engagement of the English at sea against
the Dutch fleet, wherein Van Tromp their general was slain, and his
fleet extremely shattered, sunk, and disabled, to the great terror of
the United Provinces. Then also the Maidstone frigate underwent the
loss of many seamen; and the Captain continued his post till the
restoration of Charles the Second, when he was dismissed from his
command, and another commander placed in his room; after which he
retired to his country-house of Le-Feock aforesaid.

It also appears from Penrose’s Journal whilst he commanded the
Maidstone, that she was one of the five ships under Sir George
Ayscough that was ordered by the then Parliament of England to sail
into the Sound, or German Sea, to assist the King of Sweden against
the Danes. But a peace being concluded betwixt those nations, soon
after the arrival of those ships, nothing of action was performed by
them. Nevertheless, the King of Sweden rewarded the five captains of
those ships in this expedition, with so many medals and neck-chains of
gold, with the King of Sweden’s face on one side of the medal, and the
several arms of those gentlemen on the other, weighing about eighteen
ounces each together with the chain. Penrose’s medal is yet to be seen
with his daughter.

In the year 1664, when another Dutch and French war broke out between
them and Charles the Second, and able sea-officers were wanted for the
fleet, Penrose (who as aforesaid for several years had been displaced)
had divers letters sent to him from James Duke of York, and the Duke
of Albemarle (formerly General Monk), by order of Charles the Second,
requesting in this time of need that he would come up to London,
accept of the command, and take the charge of the Monk frigate, in the
Dutch war; which at length with some reluctance he accepted. In which
post he discharged the place with such care and faithfulness as before
he had done in the Parliament service. And, moreover, in the three
sea-fights which the Duke of York and the Duke of Albemarle had with
the Dutch fleets, (in all which he was commanded, though but a
third-rate ship, to follow the admiral or general’s ships,) he behaved
himself with such prudent valour and conduct (though with the loss of
several hundreds of his men) that he preserved his ship, to the
admiration of all that saw her, from destruction, though often boarded
and surrounded with enemies.

In brief, those matters are so abundantly set forth in the several
letters of thanks, after those engagements, from the said Dukes and
their Secretaries to Penrose, that if I should take the pains to
transcribe them, they would only be thought a romance, as containing
in them almost unparallelled adventures and dangers, which he most
valiantly and successfully passed through, in the midst of seas,
slaughter, fire, and bullets, were not the originals yet extant, and
to be seen.

Lastly, it appears from letters, and his Journal, which he kept daily
for eighteen years’ space, which he spent at sea in the public service
of his country, that in the year 1667 he was by Charles the Second
made Admiral of a squadron of ships of sixteen men-of-war, which were
ordered to cruise between Harwich and Newcastle towards the coasts of
Holland, to watch the motion of the enemy. Where he received many
letters by King Charles’s order from the Secretaries of State, War,
and Admiralty, as also from the Dukes aforesaid (yet to be seen),
containing thanks for his good service, and further desiring the
continuance of his care, conduct, and watchfulness against the enemy,
whensoever they should put out to sea again: in the mean time to
observe such further orders as should be sent him.

In this kind of post he remained till his death, 1669, King Charles
then owing him for his salary or pay above 1,500_l._ of which neither
he nor his heir or executor ever received a farthing. His death was
thought to be hastened through grief and vexation (being scarcely
fifty-six years old when he died), and the occasion thus:――His ship,
the Monk, being all manned with Cornish men in those three last
engagements with the Dutch, who for the love and respect they bore
him, their countryman, were all volunteers without being impressed for
the public service; now it happened that, in the year 1668, peace
being concluded betwixt King Charles and the States of Holland, the
greatest part of our English fleet were hauled up, the officers,
seamen, and soldiers disbanded, without satisfaction, wages, or pay
for their service; and amongst them Captain Penrose’s ship and
squadron underwent the same fate. So that soon after, he happening to
be at London upon some occasions, his disbanded company of Cornish men
from the Monk, being far from home, were very troublesome and
tumultuous with him about their pay, and so clamorous as to tell him
that he, by his fair promises, had cajoled them into the public
service, and that now they could get nothing for their labour and the
hazard of their lives.

The Captain answered for himself, as well as he could, that it was his
own case, as well as many other officers’ and theirs, at this exigence
to want his money, and therefore desired their patience till the King
was better provided with cash for their satisfaction. But the Cornish
men being more and more dissatisfied with him by those delays, and
their wants and necessities pressing hard upon them, they formed a
petition, setting forth the premises, to his Majesty, and with the
same came to the Captain’s chamber, and endeavoured (after words would
not prevail) to constrain or compel him in person to present it to the
King’s Majesty, which he refusing to undertake, a scuffle happened at
the top of the stairs between him and the petitioners; in which
conflict one Lampeer, of Truro, by thrust of Penrose’s hands, his feet
and hands failing, was thrown over the stairs, and so much bruised
with the fall that soon after he died.

Whereupon Penrose was apprehended, held upon bail, and afterwards
indicted before the grand jury of Middlesex or Westminster, and found
guilty of murder or manslaughter, and afterwards was tried for his
life, and by the grand and petty jury found guilty of manslaughter:
that is to say, the unlawful killing of a man without premeditated
malice, (which is felony, because wilful――but admits of the benefit of
clergy for the first crime,) whereupon Penrose was condemned to death,
and put into Newgate, where forthwith he received a reprieve or pardon
of this offence from Charles the Second, under the broad seal of
England, yet to be seen. Nevertheless, for the drawing, sealing, or
procuring this pardon, the clerks and officers through whose hands it
passed extorted from the Captain 200_l._ before he could get out of
their hands to show it to the Sheriff of Middlesex.

This unhappy accident so troubled Penrose, that, to put off the
thoughts thereof, he kept company more than ordinary with gentlemen
and officers of the fleet and others; so that at length, by excess of
drinking healths, and otherwise, he fell into a malignant fever,
whereof he died, leaving issue one only daughter, his heir, named
Martha, married to James Hals, of Merther, Gent.

Tre-gew, alias Tregue, in this parish, synonymous words, signifying
the spear or javelin town, is the dwelling of Henry Edmunds, Gent.
originally descended from the Edmunds of Middlesex, whose ancestor,
being a person well qualified for the purpose, temp. James I. was sent
from London by the Company of Pewterers to inspect and try the Cornish
tin, then corrupted by the blowers thereof, before it was coined, that
so the bad metal might be examined and taxed before it was coined,
proportionable to the badness. In which assay-master’s office he
thrived so well, that at length he became a tin-factor himself, grew
rich, and bought this place, and other lands near, as also the manor
of Truro, of Sir Bevill Grenvill, Knt. But he and his security failing
in paying the consideration money, he was cast into prison, where he
died without further satisfation to his said creditor; notwithstanding
which, those lands descended to his heir, now in possession thereof,
except the manor of Truro, sold to Samuel Enys, Esq.

The Cornish tongue was retained in this parish by the old inhabitants
thereof, till about the year 1640. Mr. William Jackman, then Vicar
thereof, Chaplain of Pendennis Castle, at the siege thereof by the
Parliament Army, was forced for divers years to administer the
Sacrament to the communicants in the Cornish tongue, because the aged
people did not well understand the English, as himself often told me.
Now because it may not be unacceptable to the curious to know the
Cornish words then used in administering the bread and wine to the
communicants, I will here set them down, for their satisfaction:

   The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given
  _An Gorfe ay agan Arluth Jesus Chrest toan fe ry_
   for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto eternal life;
  _rag thy, gwetha tha gorfe hag eneff, warthe Ragnaveffera;_
   take and eat this in remembrance that Christ died
  _kemera hag dybbery henna en predery may Chrest marnans_
   for thee, and be thankful.
  _rag thy, hag be grassylen._

Again:

   The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for
  _An goyse ay agan Arluth Jesus Chrest toan the fowle rag_
   thee, preserve thy body and soul unto eternal life, drink
  _thy, gwetha tha gorfe hag eneff warthe Ragnaveffera; evah_
   this in remembrance that Christ’s blood was shed for
  _henna in prederry may Chrest’s goyse be towle rag_
   thee, and feed on him in thy heart by faith and
  _tha, hag dybbery wor ren en tha gollon ryb creignans hag_
   thanksgiving.
  _grassylen._

Mr. John Lanyon, of this parish, a sea sand-barge daily labourer, had
a son named John Lanyon, who having had his education under Hugh
Boscawen, Gent. Master of Arts, who kept a school at St. Michael
Penkivell Church, became afterwards a steward to Trefusis, St. Aubyn,
Coryton, and lastly came into the service of Brook Lord Chandos, and
having by these services accumulated considerable riches, he gave
lands, and built and endowed an almshouse for poor people.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin does not make any addition to the history of this parish,
except by stating that James Hals, who married Martha Penrose, the
only child of Captain Thomas Penrose, was “an elder brother of the
author; and that their eldest son, then about fourteen years of age,
was engaged in the pursuit of his grandfather’s profession, by serving
as one of the King’s scholars, or gentlemen volunteers, on board the
Sunderland, Captain Tudor Trevor commander, receiving about 30_l._ per
annum of his Majesty.”


THE EDITOR.

Trelisick is now the most splendid feature of this parish. The
situation, beautiful in all other respects, commands a view of the
whole inland sea constituting Falmouth Harbour. The House was built
about the middle of the last century, by Mr. John Laurence, a captain
in the county militia, during the Seven Years’ War, still remembered
for his good-nature, convivial habits, and wild eccentricities. It is
perhaps deserving of notice that the architect was Mr. Davy,
grandfather of the celebrated chemist.

The property became divided on Mr. Laurence’s decease; and it was
purchased, about the year 1800, by the late Mr. Ralph Allen Daniell;
other lands were added to the domain, and the whole became a handsome
seat suited to the natural advantages of the place.

Still further additions and decorations have been made by his son, Mr.
Thomas Daniell; but this gentleman choosing to quit Cornwall, has sold
the whole to Lord Falmouth, the proprietor of Tregothnan, a still more
magnificent seat, and removed from Trelisick only a few miles further
up on the Truro river.

Mr. Thomas Daniell, the grandfather, was chief clerk to Mr. Lemon, and
having married Miss Elliott, niece of Mr. Allen, of Bath, he found
himself enabled to take the whole of Mr. Lemon’s great concerns off
the hands of his executors in 1760; and soon after to build the house
in Truro, remarkable not only on account of its being the largest and
most decorated mansion in that very splendid town, but as being
constructed of Bath Oolite, the gift of Mr. Allen, from Prior Park.

Mr. Daniell continued throughout his whole life to conduct most
extensive concerns as a general merchant, as a tin smelter, and, above
all, as a spirited adventurer in mines on the largest scale. He left
one son and one daughter.

The daughter married the Rev. John Napleton, a dignitary in the church
of Hereford, and previously tutor at Brasenose college, Oxford; where
he is well known as the author of a work (“Elementa Logicæ, subjicitur
Appendix de Usu Logicæ et Conspectus Organi Aristotelis”) which has
been adopted into the lectures of every college throughout the
University. The son, Mr. Ralph Allen Daniell, continued most of his
father’s concerns, adding to them a large smelting-work for copper in
Glamorganshire; and so successful were his mining speculations, that
he is said to have gained, in the course of a very few years, above a
hundred and fifty thousand pounds from Wheal Tower alone.

Mr. Daniell was twice Member for West Looe. He married the only
daughter of the Rev. Mr. Pooley, Rector of Ladock, and has left a
numerous family. His eldest son has married Miss Osbaldeston, and they
have several children.

Killiganoon, probably the grove by the downs, is next to be noticed in
Feock.

The place was entirely created by Mr. Richard Hussey. This gentleman
was the son of an attorney at Truro, who died insolvent, leaving a
widow with one son, and three or four daughters. The son is
represented to have exerted himself with efforts proportional to the
embarrassments in which he found the affairs of his family, and he
became in consequence one of the most distinguished lawyers of the
time. He had the honour of being appointed Attorney General to the
Queen; and he was Counsel to the East India Company, and Member of
Parliament, I believe, for Michael. Mr. Hussey died in the year 1770,
under sixty, and divided his fortune among his sisters. One had
married the Rev. Mr. Vivian, and her grandson is the distinguished
officer, General Sir Hussey Vivian. Another sister married Mr. Walker,
of Lanlivery, and left an only son, the Rev. Robert Walker, Vicar of
St. Winnow. A third sister married Mr. Ustick, of Penzance.

Mrs. Mary Hussey, widow of Mr. Hussey of Truro, married, secondly, Mr.
William Davies of St. Earth, a half-brother of the Editor’s
grandfather, where she continued to reside; and her funeral appears on
the parish register September 18th, 1750.

Killiganeen was sold after Mr. Hussey’s decease, and passed into the
hands of Mr. Dagge. Two brothers of that name went to London from
Bodmin to seek their fortunes. One became the manager of Covent Garden
Theatre; the other pursued the law, to which both were probably
educated, and ultimately retired to this place. It has since become
the property of Admiral Spry, who improved and enlarged the house and
the plantations; and it belongs at this time to his son, Samuel Thomas
Spry, Esq. M.P. for Bodmin.

A coarse part of this parish remained uninclosed till within a few
years, and was known by the name of Feock Downs. The surface appeared
to be more smooth and even than any other piece of open ground in the
west of Cornwall; consequently, when local political dissensions were
at a great height, about sixty years ago, this place was selected by
one party for establishing races, in rivalship of others conducted by
their opponents at Bodmin. These races fell, however, with the
temporary feeling which gave them birth, and the ground is now
inclosed.

A small village in this parish is distinguished by the name of
“Come-to-Good;” a name probably given to it at first in ridicule,
because there was established the earliest Quakers’ meeting in that
part of Cornwall. And, for some reason now quite forgotten, the first
Sunday in August became designated all over that populous mining
district as “Come-to-Good Sunday,” when several thousand persons
continued to assemble, till the very prudent Society to whom the house
belongs, adopted the expedient of discontinuing their meeting on that
particular day.

  This parish measures 2,580 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2871    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           457   19    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {     696  |     968  |    1093  |    1210
    giving an increase of 74 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY.

Dr. Boase remarks on this parish, that the rocks are similar to those
of Falmouth.




FOWEY, FOY, or FOYS.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north Glant,
east the haven or harbour of Fowey, south the British Channel. For the
name, it is taken from foys-fenton, i. e. the walled well or spring of
water, rising about Alternun, St. Cleather, or Temple Moors.

In the Domesday Tax, 20th William I. (1087,) this place or parish was
rated under the jurisdiction of Tywardreth. Neither was there any
endowed church here extant at the time of the Inquisition of the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester (1294), unless (what can hardly be
supposed) Ecclesia _de Funum_ appropriata domui de Tywardreth, in
Decanatu de Powdre, be a corruption of Faoi, or Foy-town. In Wolsey’s
Inquisition, and Valor Beneficiorum, the Vicarage of Foye is rated
10_l._ The patronage formerly in the Prior of Tywardreth, who endowed
it, now Treffry. The incumbent Trubody. The parish and town rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 195_l._ 14_s._ The rectory, sheaf,
or impropriation, in ――――.

In the ancient chapel at Foy, now the minister’s chancel, was
inscribed temp. Edward III. the name of Fisart Bagga, a famous sea
commander in the then French wars, a native of this town of Foy.
[Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 135.] This church and town I take to
be under the tutelary guardianship of St. Catherine, whose history is
misplaced under Lanteagles by Fowey.

[Mr. Hals’s history of St. Catherine is lost. It may, therefore, be
sufficient to give the following short statement of her legend.

In the Μηνολογιον, the _Menology_, (the Monthly Register, synonymous
with Martyrology,) of the Emperor Basil, said to be composed by
himself, but certainly written under his own inspection, St. Catherine
is stated to have sprung from one of the families which in those times
obtained a transient possession of the imperial throne.

She was probably born at Alexandria, and suffered martyrdom there
under the reign of Maximus the Second, about the year 310.

Her learning, abilities, and zeal were so great, that, having been
ordered to dispute with several of the most able philosophers, she
confuted them all, and even converted some among them to the Christian
faith. These new proselytes are said to have been instantly hurried to
the flames, but that the Saint herself was reserved for a still more
cruel fate, the persecutors of religion having contrived a wheel set
round with hooks and spikes, for the purpose of tearing and lacerating
its victim. The legends, however, go on to say that this horrible
engine was dashed in pieces by angels, just as the tormentors were
about to use it against the Saint, whom they nevertheless decapitated,
unawed by the recent miracle, and no longer interrupted by any
supernatural interference.

The body of St. Catherine was found five hundred years afterwards,
when the Saracens had possession of Egypt, although it is not recorded
by whom the discovery was made, nor how the identity was proved. A
subsequent great event, however, placed that most important
circumstance beyond all doubt; for it having been resolved to
translate the body from the immediate power of the Mahometans to a
monastery built on Mount Sinai by St. Helena, and augmented by
Justinian, a company of angels, probably the very same who destroyed
the wheel, conveyed the relics to Mount Sinai through the air.

Some recent martyrologists have endeavoured to explain away the latter
miracle, by asserting that angels meant monks, who on account of the
purity of their morals, the sanctity of their divine duties, and the
eminent utility of their lives, are frequently confounded with the
inhabitants of heaven.――It is almost needless to add that St.
Catherine’s Wheel has uniformly reference to the intended instrument
of her martyrdom, and never to a spinning-wheel, of which the Saint is
sometimes supposed in England to have been the inventor. EDITOR.]

But for the church and tower of Foy, as it now stands, it was built
about the year 1466, towards which Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick,
was a great benefactor; as appears from his badge, or cognizance, viz.
ragged staves, yet to be seen cut in many parts of the stones of the
said church and tower thereof.

The town of Foys is the voke lands of an ancient lordship by
prescription, which the Prior of Tywardreth held of the ancient Earl
of Cornwall’s manor of Pow-vallet-coyt, now Lostwithiel, or Restormel
Castle, under the rent of ――――; from whom also they had their
privilege of sending two members to sit in the Commons’ House of
Parliament. It was incorporated by Charles the Second, by the name of
the Mayor, Recorder, Portreeve, eight Aldermen, and a Town Clerk.
Notwithstanding which, by ancient custom, the members of Parliament
were elected by the freemen, (viz. scot and lot men, that pay rates
and taxes) and the precept from the Sheriff for the writ for election
of them must be thus directed: Præposito et Senescallo Burgi de Foy,
in Comitatu Cornubiæ, salutem, &c. As also the writ for removing any
action at law depending in Foy court-leet to a superior court, must be
directed to the Portreeve and Town Clerk or Steward.

The arms of this town are, a ship in full course, with sails expansed,
on the waves of the ocean. It is further privileged with a weekly
market on Saturdays, and fairs annually, on Shrove Tuesday, May 1st,
and September 10th. This town hath also added to its privileges some
of the liberties and freedoms of the Cinque Ports, which other towns
or harbours have not: what they are, the inhabitants there best know.
Those privileges were first granted only to the ports of Hastings,
Hythe, Dover, Romney, and Sandwich, in Kent, by Edward the Confessor;
afterwards much increased in the days of the three Edwards, the First,
Second, and Third: which in this place are too long for me to recite.
Mr. Carew tells us, that in Edward the Third’s days sixty tall ships
did belong to this harbour; and that the town of Foys did assist that
King with forty-seven sail of men-of-war and transport-ships, anno
Dom. 1347, in order to the siege of Calais; whereupon that King
granted commissions to the chief commanders of those Foy ships to take
French prizes, during his wars with those people, or French nation; so
that in few years those Foy men were grown so rich and formidable, by
taking French prizes, that by force and arms they would enter many
ports of that kingdom, and carry with them all ships they could
conquer, and what they could not, would use means to set them on fire
in the places where they lay. In fine, when French prizes grew scarce,
(I speak upon the authority of Mr. Carew,) they scrupled not to turn
sea-robbers, or pirates, taking, plundering, and destroying all ships
they could master, of what country soever, not sparing the sailors’
lives. By which means the townsmen grew unspeakably rich and proud and
mischievous, which occasioned the Lord Pomier, and other Normans, to
petition John, King of France, to grant them a private commission of
marque and arms, to be revenged on the pirates and thieves of Foy
town, which accordingly they obtained, and carried their design so
secretly that a small squadron of ships, and many bands of marine
soldiers, were prepared and shipped without the Foymen’s knowledge or
notice, who accordingly put to sea out of the river Seine, in the
month of July 1457, in 35th Henry VI. and with a fair wind sailed
thence across the British Channel, and got sight of Foy harbour, where
they lay off at sea till night, when they drew towards the shore and
dropped anchor, and in the night landed their marine soldiers and
seamen, and at midnight approached the south-west end of Foy-town,
where they killed all persons they met with, set fire to the houses,
and burned one half thereof to the ground, to the consumption of a
great part of the inhabitants’ riches and treasures, a vast deal of
which was gotten by their piratical practices; in which massacre and
conflagration, the women, children, and weakest sort of people,
forsook the place, and fled for safety into the hill country.

But others of the stoutest men, under conduct of John Treffrye, Esq.
fortified themselves as well as they could in his then new-built house
of Plase, yet extant, where they stoutly opposed the assaults of their
enemies; whilst the French soldiers plundered that part of the town
which was unburned, without opposition, in the dark. The news of this
French invasion in the morning flew far into the county, and the
people of the contiguous parts as quickly put themselves in arms, and
in great multitudes gathered together, in order to raise the siege of
Foy; which the Frenchmen observing, and fearing the consequence of
their longer stay, having got sufficient treasures to defray the
charge of their expedition, as hastily ran to their ships as they had
deliberately entered the town, and as privately returned into France
as they had clandestinely come into England, with small profit and
less honour.

The town of Foy being thus consumed by fire, and plundered by the
French soldiers and seamen, the inhabitants’ former wealth and glory
reduced to poverty and contempt, they politically cast themselves at
the feet of Richard Nevill, Earl of Warwick (aforesaid), who, pitying
their distressed condition, and being Lord High Admiral of England,
granted some of them new commissions for privateering and taking
French ships, on promise of their just and righteous proceedings, and
renouncing the trade of piracy (for which reason their former
commissions were revoked); whereupon in few years they plied their
sea-business so effectually, that they increased their riches to such
degree that they began to repair and rebuild their damnified houses,
and in the stones of many of them, in memory of the Earl of Warwick’s
favour and bounty towards them, there is cut his arms, badge, and
cognizance, as aforesaid.

Nevertheless (so hard it is for those to do well who are accustomed to
do evil, as for a blackmoor to wash himself white) those Foy men, not
content with lawful privateering, fell again to their old trade of
piracy, robbing and killing the seamen of all nations whose ships they
could conquer; of which they were again detected 18th Edward IV. 1478,
who thereupon sent a messenger or serjeant-at-arms to Foy, to
apprehend some of those delinquents, and bring them up to London to be
tried for those crimes, in order to receive condign punishment. But,
instead of obeying the King’s command and officer, in contempt of his
authority they barbarously cut off his ears, and so dismembered sent
him back to his master King Edward; at which affront the King was so
distasted, that soon after he sent down Commissioners to Lostwithiel,
under pretence of raising able seamen to go in war against the French,
and that such amongst them as appeared most fit and able should have
command of some of the King’s best ships. At this news a great part of
the freemen and seamen of Foy were drawn to Lostwithiel; where they no
sooner came, but immediately they were apprehended and taken into
custody for the crimes aforesaid, their ill-gotten goods and chattels
seized by the Sheriff and King’s officers, and one Harrington, a most
notorious pirate, executed; and the chain of their harbour was removed
to Dartmouth. (Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 135.)

The harbour of Foy aboundeth with deep and navigable waters for ships
of the greatest burthen, overlooked with winding and lofty hills, and,
though narrow, extends itself in several branches three or four miles
up the country, and is navigable to Lanlivery and Lostwithiel, St.
Wenow and Laranbridge, and abounds with all sorts of fish proper to
that country, as salmon, peal, trout, plaice, soal, millet, bass,
eels, congers, pullocks, &c. here daily sold at a cheap rate. At the
mouth or entrance of this harbour, are two petty bulwarks, or
blockhouses, the Polman, or Porth-Eran on the Lanteglos side, the
other at St. Catherine’s, under Foy town, most famous for a fight they
had with a Dutch man-of-war of seventy guns, doubly manned, that was
sent from their main fleet of ships of eighty sail, that lay at anchor
and cruised before this haven, 16th July, 1666, then in pursuit of our
Virginia fleet of eighty sail, which, escaping their cognizance,
safely got some hours before them into this harbour, and, on notice
given of the war, sailed up the branches thereof as far as they could,
and grounded themselves on the mud lands thereof.

Notwithstanding which, this Dutch frigate resolved to force the two
forts or fortresses aforesaid, and to take or burn our said Virginia
fleet. Accordingly, it happened on that day, a pretty gale of wind
blowing, this ship entered the haven, and as soon as she came within
cannon-shot of those forts, fired her guns upon the two blockhouses
with great rage and violence; and these made them a quick return of
the like compliment or salutation. In fine, the fight continued for
about two hours’ time, in which were spent some thousands of
cannon-shot on both sides, to the great hurt of the Dutch ship, in
plank, rigging, sails, and men, chiefly because the wind slacked, or
turned so adverse, that she could not pass quick enough between the
two forts up the river, so as to escape their bullets, but lay a long
time a mark for them to shoot at, till she had opportunity of wind to
tack round, turn back, and bear off at sea to their fleet, to give
them an account of her unsuccessful attempt and great damage as
aforesaid, to the no small credit and reputation of Foy’s little
castles, manned out with gunners and seamen from the ships of the
Virginia fleet for that purpose, who all, by reason of the walls and
intrenchments thereof, were preserved from death, notwithstanding the
continual firing of the cannons of the Dutch man-of-war upon them;
whereby the contiguous lands by the bullets were ploughed up, to the
terror and astonishment of all beholders.

After this engagement, the cargo of the whole Virginia fleet was
landed at Foy, (its owners at London fearing the hazard of the sea in
time of the Dutch war, to transport it there by water,) and gave
opportunity to the townsmen to buy much tobacco at a very cheap rate,
which instantly, upon the conclusion of the peace between England,
France, and Holland, was sold in this kingdom, France, Spain, and
Holland, at a dear rate, and much enriched the townsmen thereby, as
Mr. Major, one of those merchants, informed me.

The chief place in this town is Plase, in British a palace, which is
the dwelling of John Treffrye, Esq. so called from some of the many
local places passing under that denomination in Cornwall, and
compounded of treu or tref frye, synonymous words, signifying the free
or manumitted town. He was the son of John Treffrye, of Rooke, Esq.
that married Vivian of Truan; the which John Treffrye succeeded to the
patrimony or lands of the Treffrys of this place, more for similitude
of name than consanguinity or affinity of blood, by the will, devise,
or entail of the last gentleman that died without issue in this house.
The present possessor, as aforesaid, is John Treffrye, Esq. my very
kind friend and kinsman, Member of Parliament for the town of Foy,
whereof comparatively he is lord and high lord. He married Stephens.
His predecessors in this place were gentlemen of great fame and
estates, and have served their country in the several capacities of
Parliament men for this town, justices of the peace, and sheriffs of
Cornwall; particularly John Treffrye, Esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall 1st
Richard III. 1482. He was a great benefactor towards building the
present church of Foy, as appears from his arms being cut in divers
places of the stones and tower thereof. Sir John Treffrye, Knt.
(probably his son), was Sheriff of Cornwall 5th and 15th Henry VII.;
William Treffrye, Esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall 16th Hen. VII. 1501,
when Richard Whiteleigh, of Efford, was Sheriff of Devon. The arms of
those gentlemen are, Sable, a chevron between three hawthorns Argent
(i. e. summer thorn, hau, haw, in British is summer).

The chief inhabitants of this town, besides Mr. Treffrye, are Mr.
Pomeroy, Mr. Goodall, Mr. Major, Mr. Toller, Mr. Tyncombe, and others.

In this town Philip Rashleigh, Esq. temp. Charles I. built and endowed
a hospital with the garb or tithe sheaf of the parish of St. Wen for
ever, towards the relief of six poor widow women, two of the said
parish and four from another parish, who receive weekly 15_d._ in
money, and suits of apparel yearly, with other privileges, but are
prohibited from begging the country, or any parish stipend. [See
TYWARDRETH.]

This gentleman got great riches by trade and merchandize, and sea
adventures; more particularly by a small ship or frigate, of about
eighty tons, bearing about sixteen cannons or demi-culverins, besides
small arms, and 60 men, for defence thereof; the commander of which
ship had a commission from Queen Elizabeth as a privateer, in her wars
with the Spaniards, to take all Spanish ships it should meet with at
sea, and make them prizes for him, his adventurers, and the Queen’s
advantage, which said privateer, or man-of-war, was so successful and
fortunate in its adventures at sea for some years, and in traffic, and
merchandizes, and prizes, that those gentlemen accumulated and laid up
great riches thereby; and in remembrance and memory of this ship,
caused the figure in memory of it to be perpetuated in a small ship,
about five feet long, made and formed by a ship carpenter, of timber,
with masts, sails, ropes, guns, and anchors, and figures of men
thereon; which is hanged up to the roof, or planking, with an iron
chain, in their old house in this town, of which ship those gentlemen
have often given me ocular observation, as well as told me the above
history of the premises, in the time of Charles the Second.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not any thing of the least importance but what is
copied from Mr. Hals.


THE EDITOR.

I have retained the whole of what is stated by Mr. Hals respecting the
proceedings at Fowey, in the periods of its greatest prosperity and of
its subsequent fall, given partly on the authority of Mr. Carew, (p.
313, &c. of Lord Dunstanville’s edition,) and in part from what he
himself had heard. It must, however, be remembered that tradition
always exaggerates facts, more especially such as bear unfavourably
either on individuals or on communities, and that the times of Edward
the Third were essentially different from those of order, protection,
and impartial administration of justice, in which we have the
happiness to live; nor can the license or excesses imputed to some
adventurers at Fowey, be more abhorrent to our feelings than the mean
artifice of a feeble government, practised to entice men from Fowey to
Lostwithiel, under a pretence of enabling them to assist their country
in the prosecution of a war, but really with the view of arresting
them as criminals.

The fact of this port having sent forty-seven ships, with seven
hundred and seventy mariners, to the siege of Calais in 1346-7, would
exceed all belief, were it not established by national records; and
Mr. Carew relates their vanquishing, in a private feud, the naval
armaments of Winchelsea and Rye, two members of the Cinque Ports (p.
315). But these two ancient towns, and the Five Ports themselves,
exhibit a contrast scarcely less remarkable than Fowey, between their
actual appearances and the relative importance they must have once
attained; except that Hastings is enlarged for the temporary residence
of strangers, and Dover from the like cause, in addition to its being
the well-known station for packets.

It is quite certain that the Priory of Tywardreth exercised
considerable feudal authority over Fowey, which, however, not only
fell into disuse after the general dissolution of monasteries, but, in
all probability, was greatly diminished by the subsequent
incorporation of the town.

The right of voting for Members of Parliament, up to the period when
it discontinued to send any, in 1832, was vested jointly in resident
payers of scot and lot, and in copyhold tenants of the manor taken
from Tywardreth by Henry the Eighth, and annexed by him to the Duchy
of Cornwall.

This manor was purchased by the late Mr. Philip Rashleigh, about the
year 1800, under the powers created by the Land Tax Redemption Act.
This gentlemen and his ancestors had long represented Fowey, and he
was succeeded by his nephew, Mr. William Rashleigh, who subsequently
sold the manor, and the whole borough property, to Mr. George Lucy, of
Charlecot, near Stratford-upon-Avon. Mr. Lucy, in consequence,
represented Fowey, and retained what he had purchased till in 1832 it
became quite useless for all election purposes.

Mr. Joseph Thomas Austen is the present representative of the ancient
and distinguished family of Treffry, one of the most spirited
adventurers in mines, and of the most judicious and enlightened
managers, that Cornwall has witnessed for many years. Mr. Austen has
diverted a river for the use of machinery; and he has sat the first
example of bringing a canal to mines, for the purpose of conveying
coal and other heavy articles, from the sea-coast, and of taking down
the ores, which are then exported from a harbour of his own
construction.

Mr. Lysons gives an account somewhat different from that of Mr. Hals,
respecting the final repulse of the French from Fowey. He attributes
the achievement to one of Mr. Austen’s female ancestors; and, quoting
from Leland, adds that after this event “Thomas Treffry builded a
right fair and strong embattled tower in his house, and embattling the
walls of the house, in a manner made it a castle, and even to this day
it is the glory of the town buildings in Fowey.” The present possessor
has, however, added considerably to the beauty of this “right fair”
mansion, by completely restoring whatever might be defective in the
existing parts, and by completing, or perhaps by improving, the
original plan.

The late Mr. Philip Rashleigh, who represented Fowey during the
greater part of a long life, added to his character of a most
respectable country gentleman, the well-deserved reputation of a
skilful and zealous naturalist, more especially in the department of
minerals, to which, as a Cornish man, his attention would be more
particularly directed. Mr. Rashleigh led the way in Cornwall as a
collector, on a large scale, of the interesting and curious products
of the mines, and left at his decease perhaps the most valuable
collection of minerals belonging to any individual throughout England.
Geology had not acquired the semblance of a regular science when Mr.
Rashleigh directed his attention to the metallic ores, and to the
chrystallography, not of Cornwall alone, but of all parts of the known
world. He has given to the public two volumes of coloured engravings
from his choicest specimens.

Mr. Rashleigh attained a good old age, with the satisfaction of
witnessing the progress through life, in various lines, of the younger
branches of his family, with the highest credit to themselves, and of
leaving his ample property to a nephew in all respects worthy of
receiving it.

For various further details respecting Fowey, the Editor must refer to
the recent Histories of Cornwall.

Mr. Lysons gives an ample account of the descents or alienations of
manors; and a very curious letter from Lord Thomas Cromwell to the
Prior of Trewardreth, dated on the 21st of May, but without the
insertion of any year, probably, however, not long before the
dissolution. See p. 109 of Lysons’s Magna Britannia, vol. iii.
Cornwall.

A considerable property was accumulated about the middle of the last
century by two brothers, natives of this town, of the name of Lamb.
One filled the office of Collector of the Customs at Fowey, the other
practised medicine at St. Austell; both left their fortunes to an only
sister, who after their deaths, and late in life, married Mr. Graham,
a gentleman from London; through whom the property has passed to his
nephew, Thomas Graham, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall in 1806, a magistrate
for the county, and resident within the limits of Fowey, where he has
built a new and handsome house.

  The parish of Fowey measures 1,726 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          4,856    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           473   16    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    1155  |    1319  |    1455  |    1767
    giving an increase of 53 per cent. in 30 years.

  Present Vicar, the Rev. John Kempe, instituted 1818.

Latitude of the Windmill near Fowey 50° 20′ 7″. Longitude 18ᵐ. 30ˢ.
west. High water at the full and change of the moon 5ʰ 20ᵐ.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish appears to be situated entirely in the calcareous series,
near its junction with the porphyritic; and thus its rocks are very
similar to those at the entrance of Falmouth Harbour.




FARABURY.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Lesnewith, and has upon the north St.
George’s Channel, or the Irish Sea, east Minster, west Trevalga, south
Lantegles. For the name it is Saxon Fara bury, i. e. the far off
hiding or burying-place, being a promontory of land shooting far out
into the sea. Otherwise Fara-bury may be interpreted as a fair or
beautiful burying-place. (See BURYAN.)

In the Domesday Roll it was taxed either under the jurisdiction of the
Botterell, now Botreaux, or Tollcarne, now Minster. In the taxation of
Benefices made by the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294,
Ecclesia de Farabury, in Decanatu de Trigminorshire, was valued xx_s._
In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, 4_l._ 12_s._ 8_d._ The patronage
formerly in the Prior of Hartland, Lancells, or Minster, who endowed
it, and passeth in presentation and consolidation with Minster. The
patronage now in Amye; the incumbent Amye; and the parish rated,
together with Minster, to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 98_l._
7_s._ 4_d._; of which parish, in the first Inquisition (1294), I thus
read: Abbas de Hartiland percepit de Eccles. Farabury p’ an. vii_s._
Prior de Morton (percepit) per annum in eadem vis.


TONKIN

thinks that this name means fare bury. The patronage in Edward Amy,
Esq. as heir of Sir John Cotton. The incumbent James Amy, his brother.


THE EDITOR.

This is the least extensive parish in Cornwall. It probably owes its
existence to the monastic establishment in the adjoining parish of
Minster, with which, as a benefice, it has long been consolidated. The
church is situated very near to the sea, and commands an extensive
view of the romantic cliffs forming that iron-bound coast, with Lundy
Island in the horizon. The name is sometimes written, and I believe
always pronounced, Fotherbury.

  This parish measures 432 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            859     0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            81    10    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   140    |    212   |    223   |    358
    giving an increase of 156 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This little parish is formed by a belt of high and precipitous hills,
and is principally composed of a very interesting rock. It is of a
dark colour, does not alter in the streak, and abounds in iron
pyrites; it is a kind of shale, and in the cliff, not far from the
church, contains a layer of some carbonaceous mineral, to the intimate
diffusion of which the colour of this rock appears to be owing. The
section of the hill by the road side, from the church to Valancey
Bridge, exhibits the layers of this rock convoluted and contorted in a
most extraordinary manner; and the same appearance is beautifully
illustrated in the cliffs at the entrance of Boscastle harbour.




GERANS, GERANCE, or GERRANS.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north St. Just
in Rosland, east Verian, west St. Anthony, south the British Channel.
For the modern name, Gerans, whether it be so called in memory of
Geruncius, a king of the Britons, successor of King Rimo, that lived a
hundred years before King Lud, according to Galfridus’ Chronicle, or
if from Ferint ab Erbyn, one of King Arthur’s admirals at sea, I
cannot determine; especially for that, in the Domesday Tax in
Cornwall, 20th William I. 1087, this district, St. Just, and St.
Anthony, all passed under the name of Ros-land, or Tre-gara-due, now
the Bishop of Exeter’s manor of Tregare (of which more under) and
Elerchy.

In the Taxation of Benefices in Cornwall aforesaid, 1294, Ecclesia de
Sancto Gerando, in Decanatu de Penryn, is rated x_l._ porcionis
Rectoris in eadem xlvi_s._ viii_d._; porcionis Prioris Sancti Antonii
in eadem xlvi_s._ viii_d._ From whence it is evident that the Bishop
of Exeter, lord of Penryn, and the Prior of St. Anthony endowed this
church, the one half as a Rectory, the other as a Vicarage, viz. that
of the Prior’s part. For the name of this church in the Inquisition
aforesaid, St. Gerandus, whether it may not possibly relate to one St.
Gereon, a Roman whose feast is October 12. In Wolsey’s Inquisition,
1521, it is valued 15_l._ 6_s._ 0½_d._ by the name of Gerens. The
patronage in the Bishop of Exeter; the incumbent Fowler; and the
parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, by the name of
Gerance, 156_l._ 16_s._ 4_d._

Tregeare, in this parish, was the voke lands of the Bishop of Bodmin,
now the Bishop of Exeter’s great lordship, so called. In the Domesday
Book for Cornwall, 20th William I. 1087, it is named Tregara-an, id
est, the town of the friend, or lover, of God. Concerning the
possession of this manor, by virtue of the Bishop of Exeter’s lease,
there happened a costly and troublesome suit, both in law and equity,
between Edward Nosworthy, Esq. then in possession thereof, and Hugh
Trevanion, of Treligan, Esq. in the latter end of the reign of Charles
the Second, James the Second, and part of the reign of William the
Third (as I was informed). The case being thus:

The tenure of those lands being copy of Court Roll, or freehold for
life, the Bishop of Exeter, the lessor, grants to the lessee a
fee-farm lease of the said manor, for three lives absolute: and so, by
custom and law, each of these lives named in the said lease are
entitled to the land successively after each other’s death, and have
power successively in like manner to grant copies of court roll to the
under-tenants of those lands absolute for three lives, to succeed each
other. Now it happened that Trevanion bought the remainder of one of
those lives, in reversion, of Nosworthy or some other first life named
in the Bishop’s lease; after the death of whom, Trevanion’s right by
custom commenced; who accordingly delivered ejectments upon the lands
and tenements of the said manor, by consent and approbation of the
Bishop of Exeter for the time being, and brought down a trial at
Launceston on the same, where the issue passed for Trevanion.

Thereupon Nosworthy filed his bill in chancery, prays a writ of
injunction to stop further proceedings at common law, and to be
relieved in the premises; where, after many commissions for
examination of witnesses, and hearing of the merits of the cause in
favour of Nosworthy’s title, it passed for him. The plaintiff
Trevanion thereon prays that another issue at law might be directed
out of Chancery to try this matter; which accordingly being granted,
upon the issue it again passed for the plaintiff, and afterwards, as
before, upon all hearings in Chancery it passed against him, by the
universal opinion and judgment of the Lord Chancellors and Lord
Keepers for the time being: “That it was contrary to equity and good
conscience that any person, who was only named a life on the bishop’s
lease, to the farmer of the manor, or the lives named on the farmer’s
lease, or copy of court roll, to under-tenants, without ever paying a
farthing consideration of money, should sell or carry away the
original lessee’s estate, who pays a valuable consideration for it, or
from his heirs or assigns after his death.” So that, in fine,
Nosworthy’s title was confirmed by a decree in Chancery. But, as I
said before, the cost of this controversy pro and con lasted so long,
and proved so chargeable, as was very conducing to the ruin of both
those gentlemen’s estates, (vide Cargoll in Newland,) Nosworthy
absconding into Holland, and Trevanion procuring himself to be made
one of the Poor Knights of Windsor.

It was the happiness of Cornwall, in the latter end of the reign of
Charles the Second, to behold Mr. Justice Dolben, appointed for two or
three Assizes one of the Judges Itinerant for this county, who so
discouraged the injustice, delay, and frivolousness of many Cornish
law-suits, and so uprightly and succinctly, upon proof of matters of
fact and law, directed the jury as to their verdict, that there was
little or no occasion for the wrangling and jangling arguments of
counsel at the bar. He further told the people in general, that he
admired how they should be so weak in judgment, as to be persuaded
into so many lawsuits in this province, wherein was nothing but pride,
heat, mistakes, or malice, by the advice and direction of lawyers and
attornies, whose trade and occupation was only to get money, without
regard had to the merit or success of their causes longer than their
client could dispense with cash. Upon those and the like arguments of
this upright and conscientious judge, the number of our Cornish trials
was much abated, and fell from a hundred and sixty _venire facias_
brought to about seventy; so that it was generally hoped by this means
we should have had as few lawsuits depending in this as in other
countries, or that all controversies would be ended by references
amongst ourselves, and that it would be said of the Court of Common
Pleas by commission transmitted to Launceston, as was said of the
Court of Chancery when Sir Thomas More was Lord Chancellor thereof,
tempore Henry VIII., who by his upright judgment, and discouragement
of trivial Chancery suits, had ended all causes depending therein, so
that the clerks and counsel had no more business there to do;
whereupon one made this rhyme:

  When More some time had Chancellor been,
      No more suits did remain:
  The like will never more be seen,
      Till More comes back again.

But, alas! this good Judge Dolben soon after, by the attornies and
lawyers of the Western Circuit all in confederacy together, as the
shrine-makers of Diana at Ephesus against St. Paul, prompted a
petition to Charles the Second against him, suggesting that the
overhasty proceedings of this judge, and his discouraging lawsuits,
tended not only to the damage of his Majesty’s revenues proceeding
from lawsuits in those parts, but to their great prejudice, hurt, and
damage, in point of their support and livelihood, as having little
else besides their profession and practice of law to subsist by; which
petition Charles the Second taking into further consideration, against
the next assizes he ordered the clerk to leave Judge Dolben’s name out
of the commission of oyer and terminer, and then he was never more
seen in those parts. Since which time the judges that come this
circuit are content to hear with great patience the loud, reflective,
perplexed arguments of counsel upon trials of small moment and
concern, if not to suffer themselves to be at some times imposed upon
in point of law and evidence therein, by the importunate arguments of
topping serjeants-at-law, according to the magnitude of the fees they
receive from their clients; so that it is become a proverb among those
men in this province, it matters not what the case be so the client
hath store of money.

Tre-ligan, or Tre-ligon, in this parish, (i. e. the legate, nuncio, or
ambassador’s town, perhaps the rector’s,) is the dwelling of the said
Hugh Trevanion, Gent. a branch of Caryhaye’s family. He married
Crossman, the relict of Courtney of Penkivell, and had issue by her
―――― Trevanion, Gent. his son and heir, whose estate being greatly
depressed by his father’s debts and lawsuits aforesaid, hath sold his
patrimony, and is by Hugh Boscawen, Esq. Privy Councillor to William
the Third, promoted to be one of the Poor Knights of Windsor as
aforesaid.

Ros-teage, in this parish, (i. e. the valley house, or fair valley,)
is the dwelling of Nicholas Kempe, Gent. that married Sprye; his
father Williams of Probus; his grandfather Budge. Ther arms, Gules,
within a bordure engrailed three garbs Or.

At Tre-wince, (i. e. the under town, or town exposed to the weather,)
is the possession of Nicholas Hobbs, Gent. that married Kempe; his
father Prouse; and giveth for his arms, three eagles displayed Purple.


TONKIN.

Most of the lands in this parish, if not the whole, are either part of
the manor of Tregear, or are held from it. This hath been, ever since
the first erection of the see, in the Bishop of Cornwall, and in the
united bishopric seated at Exeter. It has for many ages been held by
different gentlemen under the Bishops, on leases for lives.

The family of Nosworthy held it for some time; the last of which
family, Edward Nosworthy, Esq. assigned it, a few years before his
death, to Henry Vincent, of Trelevan, Esq. but Mr. Nosworthy, who was
the last life, dying suddenly at Dunkirk in 1701, it fell into the
Bishop’s hands, then Sir Jonathan Trelawny, who granted a new lease of
it in trust for his own family, with whom it now resteth. But the
barton was separated from the manor and granted apart, as it was in
the time when Nosworthy held the manor, to the Trevanions of Trelegar,
between whom and the Nosworthys arose a great lawsuit, as is related
by Mr. Hals.

Near to this barton is Trewithian, that is, the town of peace. In this
village Mr. Edward Cregoe hath lately built a good house. He married
Sarah, the daughter of John Foot, of Treleyassick, Gent. and is lately
dead, leaving a young widow and three sons, of which the eldest is
christened Friend.

To the south of this is Trelegar, the downy town. This is likewise a
large village, at one end of which stood the seat of a younger branch
of the Trevanions of Carhays. Hugh Trevanion, who was engaged in the
expensive lawsuit with Mr. Nosworthy, had a son, Hugh Trevanion. This
gentleman was so reduced as to become Governor of the Poor Knights of
Windsor. The father sold Trelegar, in the latter end of Charles the
Second’s reign, to Stephen Johns, Esq.

Between Trelegar and Trewithian is a double round Danish intrenchment,
which being very high, the middle serves for a beacon, by which name
of Beacon it is called.

To the westward of Trewithian is Tregalravean, that is the small miry
dwelling; and such it really is. This place has recently been leased
by copy of court roll from the manor of Tregear, to Edward Hobbs,
Gent.

Roseteage. This is rightly interpreted by Mr. Hals, the fair or
beautiful valley; and its delightful situation doth fairly entitle it
to this appellation.

This place, in the reign of Elizabeth, and of James the First, was the
seat of Reginald Mohun, Esq. a younger brother to Sir William Mohun,
of Hall, and a captain under Sir Walter Raleigh. This gentleman never
marrying, sold the barton (which is held from the manor of East
Greenwich, in Kent, by the payment of three peppercorns yearly when
demanded,) with the royalty of wreek, and in November 1619, the 19th
year of James the First, to Nicholas Kempe, Gent. who was the younger
brother of Humphrey Kempe, of Lavethan, in Blisland, Esq. who is the
chief of that name in Cornwall.


THE EDITOR.

Since the splendour of the Bishop’s residence has disappeared, if it
ever existed, Roseteague has been, without all comparison, the leading
place in this parish, and indeed few more beautiful situations can any
where be found. It continued in the family of Mr. Kempe from the year
1619 till about 1780, when Roseteague was purchased by Mr. Harris, of
Rosewarne, in Camborne, aad given by him to Mr. Richard Harris, one of
his younger sons; but this gentleman having remained single, the
estate has reverted to the only daughter and heiress of the eldest
son, William Harris, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall in 1773, married to
Henry Winchcombe Hartley, Esq. of Berkshire.

Trewince, situated on a hill northward of Roseteague, and separated
from it by a deep valley, is also a place well deserving of notice. An
extremely good house was built here about the year 1750, by the
grandson or great-grandson of the gentleman who made the purchase of
Trelegar from Mr. Trevanion, and it is now inhabited by his grandson.

The church commands an extensive prospect from an elevated piece of
ground, and contains a splendid monument to the family of Hobbs; and
near the church still exists a public bowling-green. Bowling appears
to have been the favourite amusement of gentlemen residing in the
county up to a later period than the middle of the last century. A
weekly meeting used to be here numerously attended during the summer,
but as most landed proprietors then occupied a portion of their own
estates, it was an invariable rule to discontinue their pastime when
the appearance of a single Arrish Mow, indicated the more important
avocations connected with harvest.

Mr. Hals has noticed that a Bishop of Exeter endowed this church, the
one half as a rectory, the other as a vicarage. This division was
effected in a very unusual manner, although in one not quite without
example. Instead of apportioning the tithe of corn to the rector, and
all other portions, as small tithes, to the vicar, the whole has here
been divided into equal shares; so that Mr. Johns, of Trewince, the
lay impropriator, is entitled to one-twentieth of every thing
titheable, and the incumbent to another twentieth.

On the coast eastward of the church town is a village called
Polskatho, or Porthskatho, the boat-harbour; and here an extensive
fishery is carried on, more especially for mackarel. This place, with
the manors of Pettigrew and Nanquitty, belongs to J. S. Enys, of Enys,
Esq. and they have been long possessed by this very ancient and
respectable family.

The barton of Tregeare was purchased in 1712 of the Hoblyns of
Bradridge, by Samuel Kempe, Esq. of Carclew. In 1765 it was leased by
Frederick Bishop of Exeter, on lives, to Nicholas Kempe, Esq. of
Rosteague, of whom it was purchased in 1767 by his cousin Nicholas
Kempe, Esq. of Chelsea, and it remained in 1823 in the possession of
John Kempe, Esq. of Newington, Surrey. The Kempes sold Rosteague to
John Harris, Esq. in 1780.

Trewithian is now vested in Matthew Garland Cregoe, Esq. who married
Anna Coryton Kempe, eldest daughter of the late Arthur Kempe, Esq.
Admiral of the White.

The Kempes of Cornwall were derived from the knightly family of Kempe,
of Olantigh, in Wye, in Kent; Richard Kempe, Esq. grandson of Sir
William Kempe, Sheriff of Kent 20 Henry VIII. is the first of the
family recorded to have settled at Lavethan, in Blisland.

  Gerans measures 2,460 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3487    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           387    9    0
  Population, {in 1801,| in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    771 |     698  |     732  |     766
    giving the unusual result of a diminution, although extremely
      small, on the population, 5 on 771, or about ⅔ per cent. in
      30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish belong to the same series as those of St.
Anthony in Powder. On the eastern side of Porthskatho Cove the blue
slate is very much curved and contorted; and is intersected by
innumerable quartz veins, which are exceedingly irregular, and partake
much of the same arrangement as the laminæ of the slate. Here also
occur, interstratified with the slate, beds of a compact blue rock,
which is very hard, and effervesces with acids, occasioned by
particles, and minute veins or strings, of calcareous spar. In the
cliff also may be seen a small patch of conglomerates, and red
sandstone of the most recent formation, such as is common on these
shores.




ST. GERMAN’S.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Eastwellshire, and hath upon the east
Landrak and Saltash, north Menhynet, west Morvall, south Shevyock, and
the British Channel; as for the name of this parish it is derived from
the tutelar guardian of the church, St. German, Bishop of Anticiodorum
in Gallia, now France, anno Dom. 425. Whether this name be derived
from the Latin Germanus, i. e. come of the same stock, very like or
natural; or the adverb Germaine, brother or a very brother; or from
Garnan or Gernan, Saxon German, signifying altogether a man, or a
complete and entire man; I must leave to others to resolve.

At the time of the Domesday Tax 20 William I. 1087, this district was
taxed either under the jurisdiction of Abbe one, i. e. Abbey Town, or
Cudan-woord, of which more under. In Liber taxationum omnium
beneficiorum in Cornubia, folio 148, Ecclesia Sancti Germani, in
Decanatu Sancti Germani, by the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester
1294, was valued towards the Pope’s Annates 10_l._; Vicar ejusdem
xl_s._ But before the statute 15th of Richard the Second, against
wholly impropriating vicarages, the revenues of this church were
wholly impropriated by the convent, and only 14_l._ _per annum_
deducted towards maintenance of two vicars to serve the cure, for
which reason it is not named in Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521. The
patronage formerly in the King of England, afterwards in the Abbat and
Prior of St. German’s. The incumbent Kendall, the rectory or sheaf in
possession of Glanvill, and the parish rated to the 4_s._ in the pound
land tax 1696, 649_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._ The now minister’s chancel of this
church was a chapel, founded and endowed by King Athelstan, at such
time as he was in Cornwall, anno Dom. 930 (see BURIAN and BODMAN) and
dedicated to St. German, of which fact thus speaks Roger Hoveden, a
priest of Oxford, in his Annals of the Kings of England, anno Dom.
1200, p. 160.

“Rex Athelstanus in potestatem Anglorum dedit unum mansionem Deo, ad
fundandum monasterium pro monachis, et Sancti Germani fratribus
canonicis ibi famulantibus in Cornubia, anno Dom. 930,” i. e. King
Athelstan, being in full possession of all England, gaue to God one
mansion, tarrying, or abiding place, for laying the foundation of a
monastery of monks, and for St. German’s canonical brothers and
servants in Cornwall. He also enriched with jewels, money, or lands,
every considerable abbey in this land. Baker’s Chron. p. 10.

This Abbey of St. German’s was afterwards endowed with larger revenues
by King Canute, anno Dom. 1020, who turned it, after ninety years
continuance in monkery, to a collegiate church of secular canons,
which might marry wives, converse in the world, as not tied to a
monastic life, first introduced by St. Berinus, Bishop of Dorchester,
anno Dom. 635; that is to say, a society or corporation of religious
men, under the government of a dean, warden, provost, and master, to
whom belonged clerks, chaplains, singing men, or choristers. Of those
men, the gloss upon the Canons Clementine tells us, that secular
priests have no certain order or fashion of apparel appointed them,
forasmuch as there is no express mention made in any canon, neither of
the colour or form thereof, by which two differences the other several
orders of religious men and women are distinguished or discerned.

In this Abbey of St. German’s, anno Dom. 986, Bishop Stidio placed the
see or seat of his Cathedral Church, (for Bodman was before burnt by
the Danes,) which he and his successors enjoyed till the year 1032, at
which time Livignus, first a monk of Winchester, afterwards Abbat of
Tavistock, then made Bishop of Kirton, by King Canutus, who after the
death of Berwoldus, the thirteenth Bishop of Cornwall, prevailed with
that King to annex the bishopric of St. German’s, thus translated
there, to his bishopric of Kirton, and turned this college of secular
priests into a priory of Black Canons Augustine, from whence
afterwards Leofrick, chaplain to King Edward the Confessor, 1049, by
licence, consent, and approbation of that King, removed both those
bishoprics to Exeter. And this fact of Kirton is more manifest from
the missal or mass book of the said Leofrick, given to the church of
Exeter.

This Monastery or Abbey of St. German’s, founded by King Athelstan,
was as aforesaid by King Canute turned into a collegiate church of
secular canons, over which a prior was governor or ruler, who, after
he had endowed the same with lands and revenues, King Ethelred the
Second having before given Bishop Stidio, to recompense his loss by
the Danes, the great lordship of Cunan Boake, still pertaining to the
Bishop of Exeter (see Prince’s Worthies of Devon, p. 9) he ordained
many good laws which sound thus in English:

“We will and command that God’s Ministers, the Bishops, Abbats,
Priors, &c. do in especial manner take a right course and live
according to rule, that they call to Christ night and day much and
oft, and that they do it earnestly: and we further command that they
hearken to God, and love chastity; full truly they wit that it is
against the right to meddle with women.” Canute’s Laws, No. 6.

The word abbat is derived from the Hebrew abba, pater, for that he is
the father or governor of his monks, who together make up a spiritual
society or corporation. Some abbats were elective by the convent,
others presentative, and under this title also was comprehended other
corporations spiritual, as a prior and his convent, friars, canons,
and such like; and as there were lord abbats so there were lord
priors, who had exempt jurisdiction, and were lords of parliament, and
what consecration is to a bishop, the same is benediction to an abbot
or prior, but in different respects, for a bishop is not such before
consecrated, but an abbat or prior, being elected or confirmed, is
properly such before benediction.

Some abbats were mitred from the pope, and so exempt from the bishop’s
jurisdiction, as having granted them from him episcopal authority; and
if either abbats or priors were called by the King’s writ as barons to
parliament, they were called abbats and priors sovereign; see statute
9th Richard II. chap. 4. But, alas! neither this Abbat of St.
German’s, nor the Prior of Bodmin, nor any other in this province, was
either a baron of Parliament or a mitred man, but were all subject to
the visitation and spiritual government of the Bishop of Exeter, till
23d Henry VIII. when all those orders of religious men were dissolved.

In this abbey of St. German’s, anno Dom. 1040, in the time of Lurginus
Bishop of Kirton, lived Hucarius, commonly called the Levite, as Bale
and Pits, in their writings of Britain, tell us; either for that he
assisted the priest at the altar as the Levites of old did, and was
more excellent, or did excel all others in that particular; otherwise,
by the appellation Levite we must understand him a priest, and that he
was universally famous in performing his function of preaching and
divine service. Certain it is, he was a holy and learned man,
(according to the laws of King Canutus aforesaid,) as the 110 homilies
or sermons, and many other books which he wrote, declare; but whether
he was a native of this province or not, I know not.

This Priory of Canons Augustine was dissolved 26th Henry VIII. and its
revenues valued per annum 243_l._ 8_s._ according to Speed and
Dugdale’s Monasticon Anglicanum.

This borough town of St. German’s, as Mr. Carew saith, mustereth many
inhabitants, and sundry ruins, but little wealth; occasioned either by
abandoning their fishing-trade, as some conceive, or their being
abandoned of their religious people, as others imagine. It appears to
have been the voke lands of a manor before the Norman Conquest; since
it is rated in Domesday Roll, 20th William I. 1087, by the name of
Abbytone, i. e. abbey-town, (for that before that time it was a
monastery or abbey of monks,) and consists of a Portreeve and forty
Censors; and the Portreeve yearly chosen, in the manor court, by the
major part of the Censors. And the Members of Parliament are in like
manner elected by the major part of them, and the precept from the
Sheriff for their election, (as also to remove any action at law
depending in this to a superior court,) must be thus directed:
“Præposito et Seneschallo Burgi nostri de St. Germanᵒ, in Comitatu
Cornub. salutem,” &c. Note, that in old British, reve, reeve, is rent,
tithes, or revenues. Port-reeve is the bearer or gatherer of the gate
or borough rent.

The arms of this priory are only the letters G. P.

It is further privileged with a weekly market on Friday, and a fair
yearly, August 1.

_The history of St. German._ He was a native of Gaul, about the year
of our Lord 380, born of wealthy, rich, and Christian parents, by whom
he was bred up and baptized into the Christian religion. After which
he followed the study of the liberal arts and sciences, and so
profited therein that he was generally noted for a very learned man.
But that which made him most famous was his piety and virtue; wherein
he so far excelled most other men of his time, that he could not be at
rest, or have peace in himself, till he made known his propensions to
a religious course of life. Whereupon he was admitted into deacon’s
orders, then into priest’s, and lastly advanced to the dignity of
Bishop of Antiscidorum, or Auxerre, in France, anno Dom. 425.

After he took upon him the office of a bishop, he discharged the same
with great justice and piety, admitting none into orders within his
jurisdiction, but such as were men of great learning and sound faith,
but especially such as were neither Arians nor Pelagians. For about
that time the Christian church was grievously pestered with two
heretics; the one Arius, born and bred at Constantinople; the other an
inhabitant of Britain, viz. Pelagius.

But the doctrines of Pelagius manifesting themselves throughout this
land, to the great disturbance of the orthodox faith and churches
thereof, after great heats and animosities between Catholics and
heretics about those doctrines, it was at last agreed upon between
those parties that a General Council of the Clergy in Britain should
be convened at St. Alban’s, in Hertfordshire, and those tenets further
examined and discussed. But the British Catholics, knowing the
interest, skill, and subtlety of the heretics to be great, thought it
not safe for religion, and the orthodox faith, in this convention to
trust alone to their own skill and learning, therefore concluded on
this expedient, viz. against the day of meeting to send for some
foreign divines for their coadjutors or helpers in this controversy;
and accordingly applied to St. German, Bishop of Antiscidorum
aforesaid, or Auxerre, in Gallia, now France, a city situate upon the
river Auxona, now called Le Disne, and Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, in
that country, for their counsel and assistance, who gladly granted
their request; and accordingly against the day, and at the place
appointed, met the British Clergy on both sides; where the tenets and
doctrines being heard, and particularly examined, chiefly by the skill
and learning of St. German, were all refuted and condemned, according
to the sense of the General Councils, as impious and heretical, to the
great satisfaction of the orthodox clergy.

After this dispute and council ended, St. German, as a good bishop,
resolved, though out of his country and diocese, whilst he stayed
here, to preach the Gospel publicly, and to that end caused a pulpit
to be set up in an open place at St. Alban’s, (so called from St.
Alban, the Briton, martyred there under Dioclesian, anno Dom. 303,)
anciently Verulam; where on set days he preached to the multitude
there assembled, and first began to handle the doctrine of Pelagius
against original sin, taking for his text the words of St. John the
Evangelist: “If we say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves, and
the truth is not in us.” Upon which subject he shewed that the
doctrine of Pelagius was contrary to the writings and doctrines of
Moses and the Prophets.

These and the like words and preachings of St. German seemed so
angelical and full of power to the Britons, that generally they were
convinced of Pelagius’s errors, and abandoned their former opinions;
and in testimony of their unfeigned respect and remembrance of him, in
the very place where he preached at St. Alban’s, they erected a
chapel, and dedicated it to the honour of God, in the name of St.
German; which chapel was extant (and still bears his name) tempore
James I. though misapplied to profane uses. (See Camden, in
Hertfordshire.) After St. German had thus preached down Pelagianism at
St. Alban’s, he travelled through Britain, Wales, and Scotland, on the
same account, as our chronologers tell us; and that, in the place
where Oxford stands, he preached six months against the heresies
aforesaid. That he was in Cornwall upon the same account I doubt not,
since there is still extant in this parish whereof I treat, a large
church bearing his name. He was in Wales, for Camden, in Flintshire,
informs us a field bearing his name, called Mars Garman, i. e.
German’s field, in memory of a battle there obtained by the Welch over
the Picts, on the prayers of St. German, and by crying Hallelujah! To
him also is ascribed the building or augmenting Landaff cathedral
there, and dedicating it to St. Delyan, if there be not a mistake in
the chronology thereof, St. German, as appears to me, being dead
before Delyan.

That he preached in Scotland, is evident from his meeting and converse
with Patrick, born at Bluisdale, in that country, who became his
disciple, and afterwards the apostle of Ireland.

This priory-house, before its dissolution, was called Porth-Prior, or
Port-Prior, synonymous words, signifying either the prior’s creek,
cove, or haven. It is now, after the name of its owner, transnominated
to Port or Porth-Eliot, who derives his title thereto from
Champernowne, as he did by a boon from King Henry the Eighth.

These gentlemen I take to be of Scots original, and so denominated
from the local place of Eliot, near Dundee, in Scotland, and their
descent of later time from the Eliots of Devonshire, Berkshire, or
Cambridgeshire, of which last county one Sir Thomas Eliot, Knt. was
Sheriff 24th Henry VIII. also in 36th. This gentleman wrote a book
called Defensorium bonarum Mulierum, The Defence of good or virtuous
Women. But that which made him most famous was, (to the disgrace of
the critics and clergy that get their livings by the liberal arts and
sciences, he being only a layman,) he wrote and composed the first
Latin and English Dictionary that ever was seen in England, about the
year 1540. Upon whose stock and foundation Bishop Cooper and others
built and grafted all the Latin and English dictionaries now extant in
Britain. He died in Suffolk, 1546; and upon the foundation, rules, and
observation of this my Parochial History of Cornwall, it will be very
easy for any other person to make a better and more perfect History
thereof.

Those gentlemen settled here about the middle of Queen Elizabeth’s
reign, and there ever since flourished in this place in genteel and
worshipful degree, serving their king and country in the several
capacities of Justices of the Peace and Members of Parliament for
their Borough of St. German’s; and amongst them, in particular, it
were great injustice to forget the memory of that worthy patriot Sir
John Eliot, Knt. for his bold asserting the prerogative and privilege
of Parliament, the freedom and liberty of the subject, in the House of
Commons, against the arbitrary and despotic power of the British
Monarch, then exerted and setting up by the Attorney-general Noye and
others, temp. Charles I. as before it had been done by Cecil Earl of
Salisbury temp. James I.: for which reasons and arguments of law he
was committed prisoner to the Tower of London by order of that King,
where he died, without payment of the 2,000_l._ fine laid upon him,
but not without suspicion of poison, about the year 1638.

Edward Eliot, Esq. is now in possession of this estate. He married the
daughter of Craggs.

Bake, in this parish, is the dwelling of the ancient and gentle family
of the Moyles; so called, I presume, from the local place of Moyle, in
or about St. Minvor, who have flourished here for several generations
in worshipful degree, ever since they married with the sole inheretrix
of this name and place; originally descended, as I am informed, from
the Moyles of Tresurans, in St. Colomb, or the Moyles of Bodmin. The
present possessor, Sir Walter Moyle, Knt. son of John Moyle, Esq.
Sheriff of Cornwall 22 James I. that married Morrice, giveth for his
arms, in allusion to their name, Gules, a moyle (or mule) passant
Argent.

I take Thomas Moile, Esq. Speaker of Parliament 34th Henry VIII. 1543,
ancestor of the Moyles of Oxford and Kent, whose name, blood, and
estate is terminated in the Finches, to be a younger brother of this
family, or those of his.

Colt-dryn-ike, in this parish, i. e. dry neck lake, leate, or riveret
of waters, (perhaps so called from some lake or leate that intermits
its current in summer season,) is the dwelling of Jonathan Trelawney,
Esq. one of his Majesty’s Commissioners of the Peace, a younger branch
of the Trelawneys of Poole and Trelawne houses, and therefore giveth
the same arms which they do. Since the writing hereof this gentleman
is dead without issue; and his second brother, my very kind friend,
Major John Trelawney, Fort Major of the royal citadel of Plymouth,
succeeded to his estate.

Millin-ike, alias Melin-ike, i. e. the mill lake, leate, or bosom of
waters, (so called from some river and a mill heretofore thereon,) was
the dwelling of William Scawen, Esq. that died without issue.

The name Scawen is local, and signifies a place where skawan or elder
trees grow, (as I have said before,) and is derived from the
Japhetical Greek, σκοβιεμ, sambachus, ebulus, the elder-tree, who,
suitable to his name, gives for his arms, Argent, a scawen or
elder-tree Vert. This is an ancient and mere British family of
gentlemen, as their name implies.

Hendre, in this parish, (i. e. the old or ancient town,) is the
dwelling of the gentle family of the Hancocks; particularly William
Hancock, Esq.

Catch-French, in this parish, was the seat of the Keckwitches,
originally descended from the Keckwitches of Essex, gentlemen
heretofore also of considerable estates in those parts, now by ill
conduct wasted, so that this barton was sold by John Keckwitch, Esq.
temp. Charles II. to Hugh Boscawen, Esq. who settled it upon his
daughter Bridget, married to Hugh Fortescue, of Filley, Esq. now in
possession thereof. George Keckwitch, Esq. of this house, was Sheriff
of Cornwall 17th of Elizabeth, as was also his son George Keckwitch,
Esq. 33d of Elizabeth. He was also a Commissioner of the Peace temp.
James I. who gave for his arms, Argent, two lions on a bend Sable,
coticed Or.


TONKIN.

The town of St. German’s lieth to the southward of Port Eliot, but
adjoining with it, and between that and Cuddenbeck: but as Browne
Willis, in his Notitia Parliamentaria, has given a particular
description of this town and parish, of which he was the most capable,
having married his lady out of it, I shall here insert what he has
said thereof:

“Its first return of Members to serve in Parliament, was in the
session held by proclamation in the 5th year of Queen Elizabeth, A. D.
1562, at which time their having Representatives was questioned;
however, Mr. Speaker declared in the House that the Lord Steward
agreed that they (i. e. the two Members) should resort there with all
convenient speed to show their letters patent, whereby they be
returned. In this indenture the returning officer is called the Mayor,
but in the next, and in all other records, the Portreeve; which
magistrate is yearly nominated and chosen at the lord’s court-leet,
held about Michaelmas by his steward, who impannels a jury for that
purpose. As to the choice of Members of Parliament, all the inhabitant
householders have votes, that have lived a year within the borough,
the bounds of which do not extend very far, and only comprehend about
fifty or sixty houses lying near the church, and not the whole vill of
St. German’s, great part of which is without the borough, as is the
rest of the parish. It is styled in some writings Cuddenbeck Borough;
a privilege which it might perhaps have obtained from Walter Bishop of
Exeter, temp. Henry III. when Penryn seems to have been made a
borough; and from this example the Prior, with the assistance of the
Bishop, might also have dignified in like manner the vill of St.
German’s, though neither of them, anno 30th Eliz. when they certified
respecting their liberties, and claims of privilege, as of markets,
fairs, &c. styled this place otherwise than the manor of St. German’s;
nor have I met with it under any other denomination than till Queen
Elizabeth’s time, or seen any record mentioning its incorporation, nor
any other charter of privileges granted thereunto; though the
inhabitants have a tradition that they had an ancient charter, which
was unfortunately stolen from them by a person imprisoned by the
Portreeve, who is by prescription bailiff of the town, and may make
what house he pleases within the borough, his prison. As to a
description of this borough, called by Carew ‘a church town,’ it
mustereth, as that author tells us, sundry ruins, but little wealth.”

Browne Willis gives the following account of the Priory:

     “After the removal of the bishoprics from Crediton and from this
     place to Exeter, A. D. 1050, Leofric, the first Bishop of Exeter,
     changed the seculars of this collegiate church, founded by King
     Athelstan, and endowed by King Canute, into Black Canons, between
     whom, and his new-erected episcopal see, the manor of this town
     was divided; and it stood upon that establishment at the time of
     the Norman invasion, as appears from Domesday Book, which informs
     us, that the manor or parish of St. German’s consisted of
     twenty-four hides, whereof the Bishop of Exeter had twelve, and
     the Canons of that place twelve also. What belonged to the Bishop
     was valued at 81_s._ per annum, and what belonged to the Canons
     at 100_s._ Domesday also shews us, that in this manor there was
     then a market on the Lord’s Day; but it became reduced to
     nothing, by reason of that of the Earl of Morton’s being very
     near, which I conceive might have been kept at Trematon, that
     Earl having privilege of a market at his castle there. That such
     was the state of this town and parish at the time of the
     Conquest, is plain from the above-stated record; and the division
     into two manors continues to the present day, the Bishop’s moiety
     being held by lease for three lives by Edward Eliot, Esq.
     proprietor of the other manor; whose predecessors have probably
     ever since the dissolution of the monasteries been farmers, or
     lessee tenants, to the See of Exeter, by virtue of which lease,
     as this manor is vested in them, so the other, belonging to the
     Priory, has thus descended since the surrender thereof, dated
     March the 2d, anno 30th Henry VIII. when Robert Swimmer, the last
     Prior, with seven Monks, yielded up the same into the King’s
     hands, who not long after, by letters patent dated March the
     10th, anno regni 33, A. D. 1542, granted to John Champernoun,
     John Ridgeway, and Walter Smith. Among other lands, the site, &c.
     of this priory, upon partition, came to John Champernoun’s share,
     whose heir sold it, about thirty or forty years afterwards, to
     Richard Eliot, Esq. my wife’s ancestor, in which family both
     those manors yet continue: which place, soon after Mr. Eliot had
     made the purchase, was named Port Eliot, since when this
     appellation has so far prevailed that Port Eliot has been
     inserted in maps, as if it was a particular vill. This family
     flourished for eight or ten generations in Devonshire, before
     their transplanting themselves hither, and had matched into
     several considerable families in that county, as the Sigdons,
     Cotlands, Bonvilles, Sumasters, Fitzes, Careswells, &c. Walter
     Eliot was returned among the gentlemen of Devonshire anno 1433,
     temp. Henry VI. And to this family, as it should seem by the
     arms, was allied Sir Richard Eliot, made by King Henry the Eighth
     one of the Justices of the King’s Bench, who was, as I take it,
     father to the famous Sir Thomas Eliot. Richard Eliot seated
     himself here, where he lived (as Carew tells us) in great
     hospitality. He left issue John Eliot, born and baptized here
     April 20, 1592. This John, A. D. 1607, became a gentleman
     commoner of Exeter College, Oxford, which place leaving about two
     or three years after, he went to the Inns of Court, and May the
     10th, 1618, received the honour of knighthood, and was all his
     lifetime after a member of the succeeding Parliaments, in one of
     which, 3d Charles I. he was chosen knight of the shire for
     Cornwall. He was a very plausible speaker in the House of
     Commons, as his speeches published testify, but, being a virulent
     enemy to the Court, often suffered confinement, and died in
     custody in the Tower of London; and, as appears by the
     inquisition on the 27th of November, 8th Charles I. A. D. 1632,
     leaving issue John, his son and heir, then twenty years old. This
     John was born at Port Eliot, and baptized October 18th, 1612,
     where he died and was buried March the 25th, 1685, leaving an
     only son, Daniel Eliot, my father-in-law, who departed this life
     about the sixtieth year of his age, and was buried among his
     ancestors October 28th, 1702. This gentleman, in regard that he
     had only one daughter, named Katherine, bequeathed his estate, in
     order to keep up the name of his family, to Edward Eliot,
     grandson to Nicholas Eliot, fourth son to Sir John Eliot, Knight,
     aforesaid.”

Mr. Browne Willis then goes on to state respecting the remains of the
monastery.

“The Priory fronts the river, now called, as above noted, Port Eliot.
It is a handsome large building, containing several spacious rooms,
and has a court before it, adorned with a strong pier by the present
proprietor, Edward Eliot, Esq. who has much beautified the whole
building.” Since Mr. Willis wrote the above, almost the whole of the
ancient building has been taken down, so that except the refectory,
now called the gallery, very little remains.

In the 26th year of the reign of King Henry the Eighth, this place had
an honour bestowed on it (little taken notice of, if not altogether
forgotten), by being established by Act of Parliament the see of a
suffragan bishop for the county of Cornwall, in the diocese of Exeter.

The advowson of this church, together with the impropriate rectory,
late the possessions of the priory, valued at 61_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._ per
annum, were granted by King Edward the Sixth to the Dean and Chapter
of Windsor, in whose hands they now continue.


THE EDITOR.

St. Germanus is among the most celebrated saints of the fourth and
fifth centuries, having gained his reputation by furiously opposing
the unpopular doctrines of Pelagius; at the same time that he adopted
all the brutalizing austerities, which in those days conveyed power,
influence, and reputation to all who practised them.

Pelagius maintained that Almighty God has been pleased to bestow on
mankind, from their births, power and inclination to execute his will,
and to render themselves acceptable in his sight; while the orthodox
supported, on the contrary, a doctrine more analogous to the practices
of earthly despots and tyrants, by declaring that such powers were
capriciously given, by little and little and from time to time,
branding their opponents with an accusation, well suited to the
understanding of those from whom distinction could then be obtained,
namely, that Pelagius set up man as independent and in opposition to
God; forgetting or concealing that the free gift was and must have
been the same in both cases, differing only in the manner after which
it is bestowed. Perhaps the arbitrary disposition of fiefs, commencing
about that period, afforded an additional analogy for assimilating the
practices in heaven to those on earth, while appeals to the capricious
exercise of arbitrary power afforded evidently the most ample field
for vehement declamation. The saint is stated in his legend to have
sprung from an illustrious family, and, while the appellation implied
a real office, to have been made Duke of a Roman province, and in that
capacity to have been leader of the troops, with whom he obtained
repeated victories, and acquired the just reputation of an able
warrior. He also excelled in the chace, but neither his skill in
military stratagems nor in the devices of the field, could protect him
against falling into an ambuscade laid by St. Amator, Bishop of
Auxerre, who, having learnt from a dream, that the young Duke should
succeed to the bishopric, enticed him into the church, and then,
securing the doors and passages, imposed on him the tonsure, with the
order of a deacon. Germanus appears to have submitted with perfect
resignation to this important change in the whole tenor of his life,
and adopting the line afterwards pursued by Sir Thomas of Canterbury
in regard to spiritual matters, and that in respect to his wife, which
enrolled King Edward the Confessor in the list of saints, he soon
obtained a reputation so high as to point him out as the most proper
person, first to succeed St. Amator, as Bishop of Auxerre, in
fulfilment of the dream, and then to go on a spiritual crusade against
the Pelagians of Britain. He accordingly embarked, accompanied by St.
Lupus, in the midst of winter, and soon encountered a violent storm,
raised, it would seem, on purpose to evince the divine mission of
these two saints, for, on their throwing some holy water into the sea,
it immediately subsided.

Saint Germanus and St. Lupus not only preached with such power as to
astonish and to convince whole congregations, too large for any
building to contain, but they gave sight to the blind, cast out
devils, and raised the dead. St. Germanus was even induced to assist
the faithful in the way of his original profession; for a Pagan army
of Northmen and Picts invading the Christian provinces, the saint took
the command of such persons as he found willing to defend their
country, and having selected a place suited to his purpose, either by
naturally possessing an echo, or by receiving it miraculously from his
prayers, he there awaited the enemy, and on their approach shouting
three times ALLELUIAH, and the whole army joining with their utmost
might, the divine sounds, repeated and enforced by the reverberation
on all sides, so terrified the assailants as to drive them into
immediate flight, with the casting away of their arms, who were, in
consequence, readily and safely pursued with great slaughter, through
the whole space separating them from their fleet, none being spared
but such as had the grace instantly to acquiesce in a method of
conversion so clear, so powerful, and so coercive.

St. Germanus and St. Lupus soon afterwards left Britain, in the full
confidence of having suppressed the heresy; but so obstinate and
perverse were the people, that it broke out with increased violence,
the circumstance of Pelagius being their countryman having probably
more weight with the inhabitants than the arguments on either side, as
in modern times all German Protestants are followers of Luther, as
those of France are invariably of Calvin.

On receiving this intelligence, St. Germanus made a second voyage to
Britain, armed with a small box of relics, suspended round his neck by
a leathern string, which acting in aid of his own inherent sanctity,
produced a train of miracles more wonderful even than those of the
first expedition. Success of course attended him; and when the work of
conversion was complete, he deposited the box of relics in the shrine
of St. Alban, to be preserved for future use, if the seeds of heresy
should again vegetate, taking in exchange some ashes of the British
protomartyr. He then finally left Britain, returning to his diocese of
Auxerre, on the confines of Burgundy; but on the way he encountered a
second Pagan army, employed by the Christian Emperor of Rome to ravage
the saint’s province, in revenge for some popular insurrection. The
saint succeeded, however, in converting the general, with all his
forces, and then proceeded to Ravenna, in Italy, to obtain a pardon
for the offenders. In this he was also successful; but having now
filled the measure of his earthly services, and, as was usual in such
cases, having predicted the hour of his own dissolution, he expired at
Ravenna, in the odour of sanctity, on the last day of July, A. D. 448.
His remains were brought back to France, with all the honours due to
the successful leader of any party, spiritual or temporal, and they
were finely enshrined in the oratory of St. Morice, which he had
founded at Auxerre, and where an abbey has since been built. Various
places in Britain were dedicated to him as to their tutelar saint. Of
these the abbey of Selby was on the largest scale, and the priory in
Cornwall distinguished by his own name, held the next place; although
a chapel near the church of St. Alban, where he had triumphed in a
general disputation with the heretics, became most celebrated,
multitudes flocking there, as to St. Mary of Walsingham, for remission
of their sins.

The ancient Priory of St. German’s has again assumed a new form since
the time of Mr. Tonkin, in consequence of Mr. Richard Eliot having
greatly increased his fortune by marrying Harriet, daughter of James
Craggs, Secretary of State in the time of King George the First. This
gentleman, and still more his son, Mr. Edward Craggs Eliot, who
obtained an hereditary seat in Parliament, after representing Cornwall
in the House of Commons, added so much to the place, by enlarging the
house, by embanking against the sea, and by laying out the grounds, as
to make it one of the first among gentlemen’s seats in the West of
England. The statute referred to by Mr. Tonkin, for conferring the
honour of a suffragan see on this town, in the 26th Henry VIII. c. 14,
passed in the year 1534, by which it is declared that Thetford,
Ipswich, Colchester, Dover, Guilford, Southampton, Taunton,
Shaftesbury, Molton, Marlborough, Bedford, Leicester, Gloucester,
Shrewsbury, Bristow, Penrith, Bridgewater, Nottingham, Grantham, Hull,
Huntingdon, Cambridge, Pereth, Berwick, St. Germain’s, and the Isle of
Wight, shall be taken and accepted for sees of Bishops Suffragans, to
be made in this Realm. This statute appears to have been very little
if at all acted on; but two of the towns, Gloucester and Bristol, as
is well known, became the seats of independent bishoprics.

At Bake lived Mr. Walter Moyle, of whom Cornwall has reason to be
proud. He represented Saltash in the reign of King William; but,
notwithstanding several successful efforts in the House of Commons,
Mr. Moyle retired to his family seat, and past the remainder of his
time in learned leisure, where he died in 1721, not having completed
his fiftieth year. Most of his works were published separately, but in
1727 came out in London, “Works of W. Moyle that were published by
himself; with some account of his life and writings, by Anthony
Hammond, Esq. 8vo.” His works were principally:

     An Argument, showing that a Standing Army is inconsistent with a
     free Government.

     Translations from Xenophon.

     The Miracle of the Thundering Legion explained.

     A Charge to the Grand Jury at a Sessions in Liskeard.

     Letters to Dr. W. Musgrave, of Exeter, on subjects of Criticism
     and Antiquity.

     A Dissertation upon the Age of Philopatris, a Dialogue commonly
     attributed to Lucian.

     Letters to and from Mr. Moyle on various subjects.

     Remarks on Prideaux’s Connection of the Old and New Testament.

     Democracy Vindicated; an Essay on the Constitution of the Roman
     Government.

Bake now belongs to Sir Joseph Copley, whose grandfather, a brother’s
son of Mr. Walter Moyle, having married the heiress of Copley, of
Sprotborough, in Yorkshire, assumed her name.

Aldwinnick is the property of Mr. Charles Trelawny, son of Mr. Edward
Trelawny, who acquired it under the will of Mr. Charles Trelawny, who
died in 1764, the last male descendant of their branch of the family.
Mr. Edward Trelawny’s original name was Stephens.

Catchfrench was till lately the residence of Mr. Francis Glanville,
Member some time for Plymouth. This gentleman’s ancestors purchased
Catchfrench from the Fortescues more than a century ago. Mr. Glanville
has given it up to his son, and on quitting the county he has carried
with him the regret of every one in it.

Much obloquy having been cast upon Sir John Eliot, by a misrepresentation
on the part of his political adversaries, of an affair in which sudden
passion very probably caused him to act in a manner different from
what would have been his conduct under other circumstances, I will add
a narrative of the occurrence, taken from Lord Nugent’s Life of
Hampden.

     “In a letter in the possession of Miss Aikin, written by an
     ancestor of one of the most respectable families in Devonshire,
     the cause and course of the quarrel are given, as described by the
     daughter of Mr. Moyle himself, a witness not likely to be unjustly
     partial to Sir John Eliot.

     “Mr. Moyle having acquainted Sir John Eliot’s father with some
     extravagancies in his son’s expenses, and this being reported
     with some aggravating circumstances, young Eliot went hastily to
     Mr. Moyle’s house, and remonstrated.

     “What words passed she knew not; but Eliot drew his sword, and
     wounded Mr. Moyle in his side. On reflection,” continues Mr.
     Moyle’s daughter, “he soon detested the fact, and from
     thenceforward became as remarkable for his private deportment, in
     every view of it, as his public conduct. Mr. Moyle was so
     intirely reconciled to him, that no person in his time held him
     in higher esteem.”

The editor cannot induce himself to believe that an English gentleman,
a patriot, and ultimately a martyr in the cause of national freedom,
could have formed and endeavoured to execute a plan for deliberate
assassination; he is, moreover, unwilling perhaps to believe it of one
who married the heiress of his own paternal family. It would be
unfair, however, not to state that Mr. D’Israeli,[3] one of the most
intelligent and candid of modern writers, and of the highest
authority, has found in the course of his miscellaneous researches,
various documents placing this transaction in a point of view much
less favourable to Sir John Eliot, than would be inferred from Lord
Nugent’s account of it. The editor, however, continues to hope that
these documents are coloured, at least, by the party spirit of times
immediately preceding civil war, when all occurrences, private as well
as public, receive their tincture from contending factions.

  St. German’s measures 9,029 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         15,283   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                         1,822  12    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   2030  |    2139  |    2404  |    2586
    giving an increase of about 27½ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This extensive parish is entirely situated within the calcareous
series. On the northern part it touches the serpentine of Clicker Tor;
and from thence to the sea-shore it exhibits many repetitions of clay
slate, of calcareous schist, and of black limestone. An extensive
quarry of the latter rock, near Trerule Foot, shews the nature of this
limestone. It is of a dark-blue colour, compact, and rather hard; and
in some parts of the mass it is very glittering, in consequence of the
numerous shining facets of calcareous spar disseminated throughout.
This rock abounds also in veins of calcareous spar, and the whole may
be traced passing gradually into the adjacent calcareous schist.

In this tract beds of compact, and of schistose hornblende rocks, are
also found, such as are common in this series of rocks at Saltash, at
Padstow, Veryon, and at various other places.


     [3] For the extraordinary “Apology of Sir John Eliot”
     regarding this “hasty and unpremeditated act of violence,”
     as Lord Eliot has judiciously described it, see Mr.
     D’Israeli’s “Commentaries on the Life and Reign of Charles
     the First,” vol. iv. p. 512. It must be also observed, that
     the fact was published by Echard, in the life-time of Dean
     Prideaux, who had communicated it to that historian. For
     other particulars hitherto unknown respecting the
     interesting character of Sir John Eliot, the reader may be
     referred to an historical pamphlet, entitled “Eliot, Hampden
     and Pym,” by the author of the “Commentaries.”




ST. GERMOE, ALIAS GARMOW.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and has upon the north St. Erth;
south and east St. Breage; west St. Hilary. In the Domesday Tax (20
Will. I. 1087), it was rated under the jurisdiction of Lan-migell, i.
e. Michael’s Temple or Church, now St. Michael’s Mount. In the
Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia
de Sancto Gordon in decanatu de Kerryer, is valued viii_l._ In
Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it is valued, together with Breock, Cury,
and Gonwallow, in all 33_l._ The patronage formerly, as I take it, in
the Prior of St. Michael’s Mount, who endowed them. The Incumbent
Trewinard. The rectory or sheaf in the possession of ――――; and the
parish, rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1694, 40_l._

In this parish stands Godolphin-Ball. This is that inexhaustible
mountain, or tin-work, which for some hundreds of years hath afforded
its owners or lord, the Lamburns, Stephens, Navas, now Godolphins, and
other adventurers, several thousand pounds worth of tin.


TONKIN.

In this parish stands Godolphin, or Godolphin-Ball, from whence the
lands thereof were denominated de Godolphin; who for many ages have
had a considerable augmentation of their paternal estate by the
casualties of tin from thence issuing. The same is a barren mountain,
of pretty large extent and great height; and, although wrought for tin
at the least during three hundred years, seems still, like the widow’s
cruise of oil and barrel of meal, to increase in the using, for,
notwithstanding the incredible quantities of tin that have been taken
thence in former ages, it still affords employment, and pays the
wages, with some overplus, of at least three hundred men throughout
the year.

The name of this parish is derived from its patron St. Germow, or
Germach, said to be an Irish king, who came over with St. Breage. St.
Germow is there buried, and his tomb or chair is still to be seen in
the churchyard.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals has given the history of St. Gordian at very great length, to
whom, without the slighest authority, he assumes this church and
parish to have been dedicated. I have omitted the whole, as entirely
unconnected with Cornwall, and because the very existence of such a
saint is at the least doubtful. The writers of legends now content
themselves with stating that some one of that name was beheaded at
Rome in the year 362, as appears from the ancient Martyrologies; that
his body lay many centuries in a cave, together with the remains of
St. Epimachus, brought there from Alexandria, and that both relics are
preserved in the Benedictine Abbey of Kempton, in the diocese of
Ansbury.

The tradition of St. Germoe having been a king in his native country,
is cherished by the inhabitants up to the present time, and they point
to his tomb or shrine in the churchyard, with an evident feeling of
their being elevated by his dignity.

But, on whatever grounds the ancient claims of this parish may rest to
a canonized or to a royal patron, the village of Bojil has in modern
times bestowed more real honour on the whole district, than could be
derived from regal missionaries or from legendary saints.

In the parish register of Breage may be seen the following entry:
“William, the son of William Lemon, of Germo, was baptized the 15th
day of November, 1696.”

I have endeavoured, but without much success, to collect information
respecting this very extraordinary man. It appears that his father and
mother, whose maiden name was Rodda, were in a situation of life
raised above the common level, and that they bestowed on their son the
best education easily attainable, who on his part became eminently
distinguished among his companions. If young Lemon ever, therefore,
employed himself in executing the inferior labours usually performed
by mining boys, as some have alleged with the view of increasing the
wonder of his subsequent progress, and others impelled by less
laudable motives, it is clear that they must have been undertaken from
a desire of making himself practically acquainted with all the details
of perhaps the most delicate operations in metallurgy.

His bodily strength and firmness of mind seem to have been
commensurate with those abilities, which displayed themselves most
conspicuously in after life. Within my recollection, the people of
Breage and Germoe were fond of relating that Squire Lemon in his youth
made the foremost link of a living chain, which, connected only by the
grasp of their hands, extended itself into a tremendous surf, and
rescued various human beings from a watery grave.

At a very early age, Mr. Lemon became one of the managers of a
tin-smelting house at Chiandower, near Penzance; and the career which
he pursued with so much ability and success, was traced for him at
this place.

The ancient mining of Cornwall, like that of Banka in the present day,
had been confined for a long succession of ages to merely collecting
diluvial deposits of tin ore, which, from its great specific gravity,
is always found beneath every other debrit, and immediately incumbent
on the solid rock, or unmoved strata, provincially called “the Fast.”
As the first operation invariably consists in washing away the lighter
ingredients, by agitating the whole in streams, which never fail of
gliding through the vallies where alone these deposits are found, the
name “stream-work” has been adopted, to distinguish these sources of
tin from mines which descend on the lodes themselves.

Mines invariably grew out of the stream-works, but with a progress so
very slow as scarcely to be imagined by persons conversant only with
the rapid improvements of modern times. Pits were at first sunk on the
backs of lodes, till the presence of water impeded the work. Shallow
adits, or drains, were obviously used in favourable situations, and
the windlass, with its bucket and rope, must be of great antiquity. To
this succeeded the rack and chain pump, identical with those still
used in large ships; but the span beam and cage, moving on a
perpendicular axis, by which the labour of horses became applicable to
what had previously been done by the human arm, are so very modern,
that the Editor remembers a carpenter who used to boast that he
assisted in making the first whim ever seen westward Hayle.

A new era had, however, now commenced. The steam-engine, which
consists essentially in a piston alternately sliding through a
cylindrical vessel, invented by Mr. Newcomen, of Dartmouth, had been
used at least on one mine, called the Great Work, in Breage, when Mr.
Lemon came forward, gifted with the ability and the energy which
enabled him to anticipate, by nearly half a century, everything that
could add to the wealth and to the prosperity of his native county.

Mr. Lemon first associating himself with Mr. George Blewett, of
Marasion, and with Mr. Dewen, commenced working a mine on a farm
called Trowel, in the parish of Luddvan, the property of Lord
Godolphin, and named Whele Fortune, where the second steam-engine was
used. Capital was of course requisite for the undertaking, and that is
said to have been supplied to Mr. Lemon by his marriage. It appears,
from the register of Gulval, that “William Lemon and Isabel Vibert
were married April the 22d, 1724.” The Viberts were among what are
termed the good lines in Gulval parish, and Mrs. Lemon had recently
succeeded by will to the property of Mrs. Elizabeth Noles her
godmother, and probably relation, who had acquired a fortune by some
business at Chiandower.

But fortune, except perhaps for its timely supply of capital, was the
least of Mrs. Lemon’s recommendations; uniform report has represented
her as entirely worthy of the very extraordinary person to whom she
was united.

Mr. Lemon is said to have gained from Whele Fortune ten thousand
pounds; and, thus enabled to execute more extensive plans, he removed
to Truro, and commenced working the great Gwennap mines, on a scale
never witnessed before, and perhaps never contemplated, in Cornwall.
Cavnon Adit was either actually commenced, or at the least was
effectually prosecuted, by Mr. Lemon; a work unrivalled for extent or
for utility in the mines of England, and his exertions increasing as
his means enlarged, Mr. Lemon soon became the principal merchant and
tin-smelter of Cornwall. But the energies of his mind were not limited
to these undertakings, great as they were; he cultivated a taste for
literature, and, what is extremely unusual, acquired, amidst business,
and at a middle age, the power of reading the Classic authors in their
original language. In the year 1742, we find his name in the list of
Sheriffs. He became one of the magistrates of Truro, and might have
represented the borough in Parliament. He obtained from Government a
drawback of the duty on coal used in mines, when Sir Robert Walpole,
then at the head of public affairs, complimented him on the clear and
able manner in which he had made every statement; and a present of
silver plate from Frederick Prince of Wales, as Duke of Cornwall, is
preserved in his family.

About the same time he was mainly distinguished as “the great Mr.
Lemon;” but, above all, so strongly were the impressions received of
his abilities, his exertions, and general merit, that a progress so
rapid and unexampled does not appear to have excited envy, or any of
those bad passions which usually alloy the enjoyments of prosperity.

Mr. and Mrs. Lemon had but one son, and no daughters. Mr. William
Lemon, Jun. married Ann, only daughter of Mr. John Willyams, of
Cannerton, near St. Colomb, and sister of the late Mr. John Oliver
Willyams, many years Colonel of the Cornwall Militia. He died at an
early period of life, and several years before his father, who lived
to the 25th of March 1760, and is buried in Truro church, where he had
built by far the largest and most decorated house in the town. He had
also purchased and improved Carclew, since become the family seat.

The younger Mr. William Lemon left two sons and a daughter. The elder
of the sons, Sir William, represented the County of Cornwall in
Parliament during fifty years, and commanded the regiment of militia.
The second son, John, became a Colonel in the Guards, represented
Truro, and commanded the Miners’ Militia. The daughter married Mr.
John Buller, of Morval, near Looe.

As instances of the respect paid to the commanding genius of Mr.
Lemon, the people of Truro are said to have drawn back from their
doors or windows as he passed through the street. And the Rev. Samuel
Walker, a respectable although a fanatical clergyman, exhorting the
children to be circumspect in the presence of Almighty God,
incautiously added, “Only think, my dear children, how careful you
would be if Mr. Lemon were looking upon you.”

  The parish of Germow measures 1,062 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          1,373    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           180   11    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, |  in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   629   |    735   |     830   |   1175
    giving an increase of 87 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geology of this parish is identical with that of Breage, of which
in fact it forms a part, occupying only a segment of the Godolphin
Hills.




ST. GENNYS.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Lesnewith, and hath upon the north the
Irish sea, west St. Juliot, east Jacobstow, south Otterham.

In Domesday Roll, 20 William I. 1087, this district was taxed under
the jurisdiction of Otterham. In the taxation of benefices, made by
the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, into the value of
benefices in Cornwall, Ecclesia de Sancto Genesy, in Decanatu de
Trigmajorshire, is rated c._s._; Vicar ejusdem £iiii. vi_s._ viii_d._
In Wolsey’s Inquisition and Valor Beneficiorum, St. Genis is taxed £8.
The patronage in ――――. The incumbent Crew. The rectory or sheaf in
possession of ―――― and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land
Tax, 1696, £160. 6_s._


TONKIN

has not added any thing to the little said by Mr. Hals.


THE EDITOR.

It seems to be quite uncertain to whom this parish is dedicated.

There was a St. Genesius, or St. Genes, of Auvergne in France; he
exterminated heresies and founded monasteries. His festival is kept on
the third of June, and he is said to have died in the year 662. Such
were the heroes of those days, and therefore he may possibly have been
selected as patron of this church.

Mr. Lysons states that Treveeg, formerly a seat of the Yeos, is now
the property of Lord Eliot, and that the great tithes, with the
advowson of the vicarage, have passed to him with the priory of St.
German’s.

The Yeos were persons of consequence in the north of Cornwall and of
Devonshire; they bore arms, Argent, a chevron Gules, between three
birds.

Mr. Lysons further states that the manor of St. Gennis was for some
time the property of Treise, from whom it passed by marriage to
Morshead. It must since have been sold in the general wreck of that
family.

Lord Rolle has also a manor in this parish. And another manor, called
Treworgy, (a name common in Cornwall, and meaning a house or village
on a stream,) belonged to the Priory of Canons of the Order of St.
Augustine, founded at Launceston by William Warlewast, Bishop of
Exeter from 1150 to 1159, in the time of King Stephen and of Henry the
2d.

Treworgy appears among the lands of this priory in the roll of 31
Henry VIII. preserved in the Augmentation Office; where it is stated
as then paying the following sums, £4. 13_s._ 7_d._, £3. 17_s._, and
6_s._ 8_d._

This is one of the manors given to the Duchy of Cornwall, in exchange
for the manor of Wallingford, and it has been held for a long time
under the Duchy by the family of Braddon.

One of this family, Captain William Braddon, was an officer of some
distinction on the Parliamentary side in the Civil War. He is buried
in the chancel of this church, where some verses to his memory begin
with these lines:

  In war and peace I bore command,
    Both gown and sword I wore.

Henry Braddon, his son, or grandson, has the following verses:

  In peace I lived, and in peace did die,
    And now translated am to peace on high;
  Where I in peace perpetual shall remain,
    Until the Prince of Peace return again.

This parish is said to afford an excellent specimen of the romantic
scenery distinguishing many portions of the north coast, from
Cornwall, through Devonshire, to Somersetshire. The cliffs are bold,
and the land is intersected by deep narrow vallies.

  The parish of St. Gennys measures 5350 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          2,562    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           308    2    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    597   |    658   |    680   |    761
    giving an increase of 27½ per cent. in 30 years.
  The Rev. John Symmons, Vicar, was presented by Sir W. Molesworth in
  1783.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The whole of this parish is situated on the massive and schistose
varieties of Dunstone, which are so prevalent in the northern parts of
Cornwall and Devon. The Dunstone is in general very silicious, and it
thus constitutes high and barren hills. A very curious variety of this
rock occurs at Tresparret Down. It is in a state of decomposition, but
when it is broken numerous hard rounded nodules fall out, having
uniformly small crystals of pyrites in their centres. The same rock,
in an unaltered state, forms the cliff on the left side of Crackington
Cave, near the church, where it is inclined at an angle of 40°, having
the entire surface covered with projecting nodules, which give it a
blistered appearance not unlike that of hæmatites.




GLANT, GOLANT, OR ST. SAMPSON’S.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north
Lanlivery, east part of Foye Harbour, south Foye town, west Tywardreth.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this district was taxed under the
name of Tywardreth, or Lan-tine. In the taxation of benefices made by
the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, in this province, the
church is not named, probably it was not then extant, or not endowed;
neither is it mentioned in Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, or Valor
Beneficiorum, so that I take it to be wholly impropriated under
Tywardreth. However, 24 Henry VI. St. Sampson’s was rated to the
Cornish clergy’s fifteenths 35_s._ Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page
91. It was endowed by the prior of Tywardreth. The patronage now in
Barret, the curate or vicar Hosken, the sheaf or rectory in Barrett.
The parish of St. Sampson’s was rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax,
1696, temp. William III. £103. 2_s._

Pen-coit, alias Pen-coid, alias Pen-quite, all synonymous words,
signifying head or chief wood, or head of the wood, is a name given
and taken from the once natural circumstances of the place, from
whence was denominated an ancient family of gentlemen, surnamed de
Pencoit. And here lived John de Pencoit, temp. Henry III. and Edward
I. who held one acre of land in Lamellyn of 5_s._ price, (that is to
say a Cornish acre, consisting of 60 statute acres) for making and
keeping the king’s grey coat when he came into Cornwall, due out of
Cabulion, from Peter, the son of Orger. [Carew’s Sur. Corn. p. 45. See
also Pengelly in St. Breock, Pyder, and Warliggan.]

This barton is now the dwelling of John Barret, esq. Sheriff of
Cornwall 3 William III. whose ancestor is said to have come out of
Normandy with William the Conqueror, 1066, an ensign under Colonel
Henry de Ferrers, commonly called Henry Earl Ferrars, son of Wakelyn;
to whom the Conqueror gave the castles of Tutbury in Staffordshire,
and Oncomb in Rutlandshire. Since which time this gentle family of
Barrets have flourished in this county in good fame and reputation for
above twenty descents. The present possessor of Pencoit married
Kendall of Medroff, and giveth for his arms, Gules, a bend Varry.

In this parish is the dwelling of Reginald Couch, gent. Attorney at
Law, that married Vincent of Creed; his father, Hawkey of St. Wenowe.


TONKIN.

How these names of Glant or Golant prevailed over that of St. Sampson
I am not able to determine, unless perhaps it was the primitive name
thereof before the parish church was erected, consecrated, and endowed
to God under the name of St. Sampson. For in Cardinal Wolsey’s
Inquisition, and in Carew’s Survey, it is called St. Sampson.

The name Golant is obviously compounded of Gol, holy, and of lan, a
church. (Mr. Whitaker remarks that Y-Gol, by the Holy One, is still an
oath in Cornwall.)


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals has given a very long and uninteresting account of St.
Sampson, the patron saint of Golant, involving a dissertation on the
antiquity of archbishops.

He is reported to have commenced his ecclesiastical career by the
practice of ascetic observances, in due time he became the chief of a
monastic institution, from whence he was taken to be Archbishop of
York; but the north of England being at that time ravaged by the
northern pirates, he was driven from thence, and going over into
Brittany he founded a monastery at Dal, and became the first Bishop of
that place, where a see was created at his request by Pope Pelegius
the First, who honoured him moreover personally with the pallium or
pale. He was present at the Second Council of Paris, held in 557, and
died about the year 564. His remains were enshrined at Dal, but when
the Normans began in the tenth century to invade and pillage Neustria,
these barbarians, equally hostile to the saint alive or dead, obliged
his brethren to remove the relics to Paris, where they are supposed to
have been preserved up to the period of the great revolution.

Penquite was acquired by purchase about the beginning or towards the
middle of last century from the Prestwoods, by Mr. Rashleigh, of
Menwhilly, by whom a perpetual lease was soon after granted in favour
of a relation, which has since passed through various hands.

Mr. Lysons says that the manor of Lentyon in this parish, belonged to
the Montacutes Earls of Salisbury.

It appears from Dugdale’s Baronage that this property was seized by
king Henry VIII., on his judicial murder of the last Plantagenet,
Margaret Countess of Salisbury. It now belongs to Mr. William
Rashleigh, who is impropriator of the great and small tithes, and
appoints the perpetual curate, in right of the monastery of
Tywardreth.

A castle is said to have belonged to this manor, but no traces of it
remain; the appellation seems indeed to have been very loosely applied
in the latter part of our feudal times, so as frequently to indicate
no more than the residence of a chief.

The village round the church, or, according to the expression used in
Cornwall, “the church town,” is always called Golant. The houses are
situated in a romantic cross valley, nearly where it terminates in
Fowey River.

The inhabitants boast that in this village was established the first
boarding-school for young ladies that appeared in Cornwall, and they
call the attention of visitors to these peculiarities connected with
this church:――“That it has a fire-place within it; that a well of
water flows over in the porch; and that a tree in the churchyard
o’ertops the tower.”

  This parish measures 1340 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1874    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           185    5    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   164    |   186    |   248    |   314
    giving an increase of 86 per cent. in 30 years.
  The Rev. Thomas Pearse was presented to St. Sampson’s chapel in
    1815, by W. Rashleigh, Esq.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are intermediate between those of the
porphyritic and calcareous series: on the northern part passing into
the former, which are better developed as they pass on towards the
granite in Tywardrath; on the southern part the rocks begin to assume
the character of the calcareous series, which is complete in Fowey.




GLUVIAS.


HALS.

Is situated in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon the north
Peran-Arwothan, east Mylor, west Mabe, south Budock. Here was an
endowed church or chapel, or place of jurisdiction, before the Norman
conquest; for in the Domesday Roll, 20 William I. 1087, Gluvias is
rated as such. In the taxation of benefices in Cornwall, made by the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia de Sancto Gluviano,
in Decanatu de Penryn, is rated xl_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521,
it is valued together with Budock, in 21_l._ 16_s._ 9_d._; before
which time it seems those churches were united and consolidated by the
Bishops of Exeter, the patrons and endowers thereof; the incumbent
Collyer; the rectory, or sheaf, in possession of Enys; and the parish
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 132_l._ 11_s._

Roscrow is the dwelling of Alexander Pendarves, Esq. that married the
Lady Dorothy Burke, daughter of the Earl of Clanricarde, and
afterwards the daughter of Colonel Granville; his father Carew, his
grandfather St. Aubyn, his great-grandfather (Roberts of Truro); viz.
Samuel Pendarves, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall, 19th James I. who gave for
his arms, Sable, a falcon rising between three mullets Or; originally
descended from the Pendarves of Pendarves, or Constenton, as I am
informed.

Roscrow gave name and origin to an old family of gentlemen surnamed
Roscrow, whose heir, about the time of Richard II. was married to one
of the Seneschalls of Holland, where John de Seneschall held by the
tenure of knight’s service part of a knight’s fee of land, 3 Henry IV.
(See CAREW’S Survey of Cornwall, p. 40.) from whence it appears also
that Luke, the son of Bernard Seneschallus, was by letters mandatory,
or a mandamus, made one of the Barons of the Exchequer, by King
Richard I. (See his arms under GWENDRON.)

Innis, Enys, Ennis, is an island or place encircled with water, in
this place to be construed as a river island; where two rivers in
their confluence meet, and shape the land between them in form of a
corner, or triangle; from which place was denominated an old British
family of gentlemen now in possession thereof, surnamed Enys;
particularly John Enys, Esq. that married the inheritrix of Gregor of
Truro, his father Pendarves, his grandfather Winifred, daughter and
coheiress of Thomas Price, of Trewardreva; and giveth for his arms,
Argent, three water enets Vert, creatures frequently seen in the
rivers by which those lands are insulated.

A great number of places, or lands, in Cornwall, under the like
circumstances, are from thence denominated Enys, Ennis, and Ennys in
St. Erme, Roach, Luxsilian, Peransand, taken some times with other
words.

Gosose river, in this parish (the slow-wood river), situate upon
Gosose creek of the sea: from whence was denominated Gosose tenement,
the native place of Captain Henry Carverth (i. e. rock-strength, or
car-veth, rock-grave), who being bred to sea affairs and navigation in
his youth, was taken into the service of King Charles II. in the
beginning of his Dutch and French war, 1665, to whom he gave the
command of a frigate, in the several engagements of the Dukes of York
and Albemarle in their sea-fights with those nations; wherein he
demeaned himself so well in point of valour and conduct, that after
those wars were ended he was chosen one of the standing Captains under
the Earl of Ossory, for which he received about 300_l._ per annum
salary, during his life, which ended about the year 1684, when he had
a military interment in this church: who dying without legitimate
issue, left his brother, Thomas Carveth, of this place, gentleman, his
heir and executor, who giveth for his arms, Argent, a chevron between
three talbots Sable. Those gentlemen, from living at Carveth, or
Carverth, in Mabe, were transnominated from Thoms to Carverth; as
another family of those Thomses, from living at Carnsew, in the said
parish, were transnominated to Carnsew; and there are some deeds yet
extant dated tempore Henry VIII. which will evidence the truth of this
fact, as Mr. Carverth told me.

Between the parishes of Budock and Gluvias, on a promontory of land
shooting into the sea creek of Falmouth harbour, between two vales and
hills, where the tide daily makes its flux and reflux, stands the
ancient borough of Penrin, or Penryn, a name given and taken from the
natural circumstances of the place; and by the name of Penrin it was
taxed as the voke lands of a considerable manor in Domesday Roll, 20
William I. 1087. (See BRIN, BRYN, in WITHELL.)

This place I take to be the Οκρινυμ (Ocrinum) of Ptolemy. The town was
a privileged manor, with a court leet, before the Norman Conquest; and
in the year 1230 King Henry III. granted a charter to William Brewer,
Bishop of Exeter, then lord thereof, as his successors still are, in
right of the bishopric of Bodman, or Cornwall, long before annexed to
Exeter. (See more in LANWHITTON.) It was also incorporated by King
James I. by another charter, consisting of a Mayor, Recorder, and
Portreeve, eleven Magistrates, and twelve Assistants; with liberty to
send two of its members to sit in the Commons’ House of Parliament, to
be elected by the majority of those that are freemen, and pay rates
and taxes. It is also, amongst many other things, appurtenanced with
markets weekly, upon Wednesdays and Saturdays; fairs on May 1, July 7,
December 21; and of old had free warren in all the King’s lands. The
arms of this town are a Saracen’s head couped at the shoulder, and
crowned, or environed, with a laurel.

The precept from the Sheriff on the Parliament writ, as also to remove
an action at law depending in this leet to a superior court, must be
thus directed: “Majori et Burgensibus Burgi sui de Penrin in Comitatu
Cornubiæ salutem,” otherwise, “Proposito, Ballivis, et Burgensibus
Burgi sui de Penryn;” and to remove an action from the court leet of
Penryn foreign: “Senescallo et Ballivis manerij de Penrin forreigne
salutem.”

But, alas! notwithstanding all its privileges, our Cornish historian,
Mr. Carew, in his time, tells us that on the top of a creek Penrin
town hath taken up its seat; rather passable than notable for wealth,
buildings, or inhabitants. Though now, _tempore_ Charles II. I take it
to be much altered for the better in these particulars, and to be
parallel with, or equal therein, with any other town in Cornwall. And,
moreover, I look upon it as the most commodious, pleasantly situated,
and healthful borough within that province, it being situated upon a
hill, and having continually passing through its streets a useful
river of water, and through the gardens and orchards of the town,
behind the street-houses on each side, pass two considerable
mill-leats, or rivers of water, met daily by the flux and reflux of
the sea.

Where, on the south of this town, on one of those rivers, Walter
Brounscomb, Bishop of Exeter, 1260, at a place called Glasnith, or
green-ford, so named from the estuaries, or ebbing and flowing of the
sea under it, founded and endowed a collegiate church of Black Canons,
or Canons Augustine, that could not marry wives, consisting of twelve
prebends and a dean; “Clerici tresdecem, personæ discretæ,” are the
very words of the leger book of its foundation; and then endowed and
confirmed all by a charter in these words, as translated from Bishop
Brounscomb’s original Latin.

     “To give to God, the blessed Virgin Mary, and St. Thomas of
     Canterbury, in Budock, Penryn, and Glasnith College, and his
     thirteen canonical brothers and their successors, all lands,
     woods, meadows, waters, pastures, mills, laws, rents, and courts,
     and all things to the same pertaining, to possess, have, hold,
     and enjoy for ever. This agrees with the register,
                               ROBERT MICHELL, Register, 1611.”

Afterwards this collegiate church, thus founded and endowed, and
dedicated to the Virgin Mary and Thomas Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury, received a greater augmentation of wealth, lands, and
revenues from John Grandison, Bishop of Exeter, 1358, who had
persuaded all rich priests of his diocese to make him his heir and
executor, in order to build and endow churches with their riches;
which trust, in a great measure, he performed to his lasting credit
and renown; so that at length, amongst others, this collegiate
church’s yearly revenues, at the suppression, 26 Henry VIII. was
valued at 205_l._ 10_s._ 6_d._ according to Speed and Dugdale’s
Monasticon Anglicanum, now worth 1200_l._

This collegiate church is now entirely demolished. Since the beginning
of this century there was one of its towers standing, but it is lately
pulled down, and a dwelling-house built in the place where it stood.

Bishop Brounscomb died 1280, and lies buried in his cathedral church
of Exeter.

The chief inhabitants of this town of Penrin are Mr. Hallamore, Mr.
Worth, Mr. Hearle, Mr. Kempe, Mr. Bloyse, Mr. Melhuish, Mr. Vellhuish.

The Lady Jane Killigrew, of Arwinick (see FALMOUTH), for some
protection and favour shewn her in her troubles by the Mayor of this
town, gave a silver cup and cover to the Mayor of this town and his
successors for ever, containing about three quarts, and about 12_l._
value, whereon is this inscription: “From Mayor to Mayor, to the town
of Penryn, when they received me in great misery.

                      JANE KILLYGREW, 1613.” (of which before).


TONKIN.

After transcribing, with little variation, what has been stated from
Mr. Hals, Mr. Tonkins adds,

Enis, in this parish, gave name to an old family of gentlemen from
thence, denominated de Enis; that is to say, of this island; for
innis, ennis, enys, signify in Cornish, an island, and also a tongue
of land where two rivers meet.

John Enys, Esq. acquired a great flow of wealth by his marriage with
Ann, only daughter of Mr. Henry Greys of Truro. His son, Samuel Enys,
is the present possessor of the estate; he married Dorothy, daughter
of Thomas Willis, of London, merchant, and has lately succeeded to a
considerable fortune by the decease of her two brothers, Sir Thomas
and Sir William Willis, of Fen Ditton, in Cambridgeshire, Baronets,
the last in the year 1733. This gentleman is in the commission of the
Peace, and was Sheriff of Cornwall, 8 Anne, A.D. 1709. He has expended
large sums of money in the improvement of his seat, as well by
enlarging the house as by making beautiful gardens.

Roscrow means clearly the valley cross; although the house stands on a
very elevated station.

The family of Pendarves settled here, have far outstripped all the
other branches in estates, and have served their country as Members of
Parliament, Commissioners of the Peace, Sheriffs, and Deputy-Lieutenants.
The arms of Pendarves are, Sab. a falcon rising Arg. between three
mullets, Or. I cannot refrain from making some remarks on Alexander
Pendarves, Esq. the last of this family.

He was Surveyor-general of the Crown and Duchy lands in Cornwall to
Queen Anne, and a Member of Parliament the greatest part of his life.
He married Mary, eldest daughter of the Honourable Bernard Grenville,
brother of Lord Lansdowne, a beautiful young lady, but she did not
bring him any children. He died in 1726, very suddenly, at his house
in London, being then a burgess for the town of Launceston. His death
was a great surprise to all his friends, and especially to me, with
whom I had taken a hearty breakfast that very morning at my aunt
Vincent’s, at Chelsea. I must add, that on the Sunday before he and I
bore up the pall to John Goodall, of Fowey, Esq. buried in St.
Margaret’s, Westminster; and that on the Sunday fortnight after, I had
the misfortune to bear up his in St. Mary’s, Savoy. He was the last
male of the family of Pendarves in this place, which, with the rest of
his property, has devolved to his niece, Mary, the only daughter and
heiress of his brother, John Pendarves, clerk, Rector of Drews
Teignton, in Devonshire, and relict of Francis Basset, of Tehidy,
Esq.; and this lady is now the possessor, paying an annuity of £.400
a-year to her uncle’s widow. But before I leave this place I must not
forget to give this just character of my deceased friend, with whom I
had the honour to serve as burgess for Helston, in Queen Anne’s last
Parliament; that for good humour, good sense, for a true and sincere
adherence to the interests of his country, and for a harmless merry
disposition, he hath left not many his equals, and none that exceed
him, in this county.

This parish takes its name from the saint to whom the church is
dedicated.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals gives a very improbable etymology for the name of this
parish, deriving it from the Cornish verb, _glewas_, to hear, which he
quotes from the 12th stanza of Mount Calvary.

  An ger a Du maga del wrei neb vynno tro glewas.
  Lavar    Du maga del wrei neb a vynno y glewas.
  The word (of) God feed so will do (he) who is willing to hear,

The first line is transcribed from Mr. Hals, the second is the line as
it stands in the MS. from which the editor of this work has printed
Mount Calvary.

The Editor has not been able to find any traces of St. Gluvias, but
these may have easily disappeared amidst the throng of our provincial
hierarchy.

The borough of Penryn, with enlarged limits, has been united with
Falmouth in sending two Members to Parliament under the constitution
of 1832. Of the principal inhabitants noticed by Mr. Hals, the Hearles
had risen into most importance. They were the younger branch of a
family said to have migrated into Cornwall, and to have settled at
Prideaux, in Luxulian, and afterwards at Trelawn, in Pelynt, usually
written Trelawny, since it was purchased by a gentleman of that name.
The last Mr. Hearle, of Penryn, married the heiress of Paynter, of
Trelisick, in St. Erth; and having lost an only son, his daughters
became coheiresses, who married Mr. Rodd, of Trebartha, the Rev. Henry
Hawkins Tremayne, and Captain Wallis of the R. N.

Enys is now the property of John Samuel Enys, Esq. where his family
are ascertained, by authentic documents, to have been seated from
times far back in the reign of the Plantagenets, and probably from
periods antecedent to them. Samuel Enys represented Penryn in the
first Parliament of Charles II. and they appear in every page of our
list of Sheriffs. Mr. Enys has built an excellent new house on the
foundation of the old; and very recently (1834) he has married
Catherine Gilbert, the Editor’s eldest daughter.

The manor of Cosawis, or Gosose, was a part of the large possessions
taken from the Bodrugons by Henry VII. and given by him to Sir Richard
Edgecumbe, whose descendant, Lord Mount Edgecumbe, parted with it to
the late Sir William Lemon.

But a farm called Bohelland has for two centuries continued to excite
great curiosity and attention on account of its having been the place
where events occurred in real life more horrible than the most heated
and gloomy imagination could well invent. Mr. Lysons refers to a small
pamphlet of eight leaves, printed in black letter, and accompanied
with several wood-cuts, entitled, “News from Perin, in Cornwall, of a
most bloody and unexampled Murder, &c.” but not having given any clue
for finding it, the Editor has examined several public libraries
without success. The following narrative has, however, been extracted
from a work entitled “The Reign and Death of King James, of Great
Britain:”

     “He had been blessed with ample possessions and fruitful issue,
     unhappy only in a younger son, who taking liberty from his
     father’s bounty, and with a crew of like condition, that wearied
     on land, they went roving to sea, and in a small vessel
     southward, took boot from all they could master, and so
     increasing force and wealth, ventured on a Turk’s man in the
     Streights; but by mischance their own powder fired themselves,
     and our gallant, trusting to his skilful swimming, got on shore
     upon Rhodes, with the best of his jewels about him; where
     offering some to sale to a Jew, who knew them to be the
     Governor’s of Algier, he was apprehended, and, as a pirate,
     sentenced to the gallies among other Christians, whose miserable
     slavery made them all studious of freedom, and with wit and
     valour took opportunity and means to murther some officers, got
     on board of an English ship, and came safe to London; where his
     misery, and some skill, made him servant to a surgeon, and sudden
     preferment to the East Indies. There, by this means he got money;
     with which returning back, he designed himself for his native
     county, Cornwall. And in a small ship from London, sailing to the
     west, was cast away upon that coast. But his excellent skill in
     swimming, and former fate to boot, brought him safe to shore;
     where, since his fifteen years’ absence, his father’s former
     fortunes much decayed, now retired him not far off to a country
     habitation, in debt and danger.

     “His sister he finds married to a mercer, a meaner match than her
     birth promised. To her, at first, he appears a poor stranger, but
     in private reveals himself, and withall what jewels and gold he
     had concealed in a bow-case about him; and concluded that the
     next day he intended to appear to his parents, and to keep his
     disguise till she and her husband should meet, and make their
     common joy complete.

     “Being come to his parents, his humble behaviour, suitable to his
     suit of clothes, melted the old couple to so much compassion as
     to give him covering from the cold season under their outward
     roof, and by degrees his travelling tales, told with passion to
     the aged people, made him their guest so long by the kitchen
     fire, that the husband took leave and went to bed. And soon after
     his true stories working compassion in the weaker vessel, she
     wept, and so did he; but compassionate of her tears, he comforted
     her with a piece of gold, which gave assurance that he deserved a
     lodging, to which she brought him; and being in bed, shewed her
     his girdled wealth, which he said was sufficient to relieve her
     husband’s wants, and to spare for himself, and being very weary
     fell fast asleep.

     “The wife, tempted with the golden bait of what she had, and
     eager of enjoying all, awakened her husband with this news, and
     her contrivance what to do; and though with horrid apprehension
     he oft refused, yet her puling fondness (Eve’s enchantments)
     moved him to consent, and rise to be master of all, and both of
     them to murder the man, which instantly they did; covering the
     corpse under the clothes till opportunity to convey it out of the
     way.

     “The early morning hastens the sister to her father’s house,
     where she, with signs of joy, enquires for a sailor that should
     lodge there the last night; the parents slightly denied to have
     seen any such, until she told them that he was her brother, her
     lost brother; by that assured scar upon his arm, cut with a sword
     in his youth she knew him; and were all resolved this morning to
     meet there and be merry.

     “The father hastily runs up, finds the mark, and with horrid
     regret of this monstrous murther of his own son, with the same
     knife cuts his own throat.

     “The wife went up to consult with him, where in a most strange
     manner beholding them both in blood, wild and aghast, with the
     instrument at hand, readily rips herself up, and perishes on the
     same spot.

     “The daughter, doubting the delay of their absence, searches for
     them all, whom she found out too soon; with the sad sight of this
     scene, and being overcome with horror and amaze of this deluge of
     destruction, she sank down and died; the fatal end of that
     family.

     “The truth of which was frequently known, and flew to court in
     this guise; but the imprinted relation conceals their names, in
     favour to some neighbour of repute and kin to that family. The
     same sense makes me therein silent also.”

These dreadful events have been wrought into a drama by Lillo, the
author of George Barnwell; and if terror and pity form the essential
bases of tragedy, the “Fatal Curiosity” is built on a most ample
foundation; the sister, of course, changes her character to heighten
the effect, but in other respects the play scarcely differs from the
actual course of events.

The celebrated Mr. Harris of Salisbury, has given the following
account of this drama in his last work, entitled, “Philological
Inquiries.”

     “A long lost son, returning home unexpectedly, finds his parents
     alive, but perishing with indigence.

     “The young man, whom from his long absence his parents never
     expected, discovers himself to an amiable friend, his long-loved
     Charlotte, and with her concerts the manner how to discover
     himself to his parents.

     “It is agreed that he should go to their house, and there remain
     unknown till Charlotte should arrive and make the happy
     discovery.

     “He goes thither accordingly, and having by a letter of
     Charlotte’s been admitted, converses, though unknown, both with
     father and mother, and beholds their misery with filial
     affection; complains, at length, he was fatigued (which, in fact,
     he really was), and begs he may be admitted for a while to
     repose. Retiring he delivers a casket to his mother, and tells
     her it is a deposit she must guard till he awake.

     “CURIOSITY tempts her to open the casket, when she is dazzled
     with the splendour of innumerable jewels. Objects so alluring
     suggest bad ideas; and poverty soon gives to those ideas a
     sanction. Black as they are, she communicates them to her
     husband; who, at first reluctant, is at length persuaded, and for
     the sake of the jewels stabs the stranger while he sleeps.

     “The fatal murder is perpetrating, or at least but barely
     perpetrated, when Charlotte arrives, full of joy, to inform them
     that the stranger within their walls was their long-lost son.

     “What a discovery? What a revolution? How irresistibly are the
     tragic passions of terror and pity excited?”

It is no small praise to this affecting fable that it so much
resembles the Œdipus Tyrannus of Sophocles. In both tragedies, that
which apparently leads to joy, leads in its completion to misery; both
tragedies concur in the horror of their discoveries, and both in those
great outlines of a truly tragic revolution, where (according to the
nervous sentiment of Lillo himself) we see

  ―――――――――――― the two extremes of life,
  The highest happiness and deepest woe,
  With all the sharp and bitter aggravations
  Of such a vast transition.

It is a very curious circumstance that the name of these wretched
people, having been kept back at first from compassion towards their
relatives, it is now actually unknown.

This parish has been peculiarly fortunate in its succession of
clergymen. The Rev. John Penrose, who died in 1776, after being
thirty-five years Vicar, has left the reputation of learning, of
piety, and of all the virtues which adorn a clergyman. Mr. Temple bore
a very high reputation as a man of letters; Mr. Howell was universally
esteemed; and the present vicar, Mr. Sheepshanks, ranked in the first
lists of science and of literature at Cambridge, and became a
distinguished tutor in a college, which continues to support the rank
bestowed upon it by the greatest of philosophers.

The town, lying on the back of a sharp ridge of land dividing two deep
vallies, has great beauty of situation, and deserves in other respects
the praises bestowed by Mr. Tonkin. To travellers, however, all the
circumstances are quite different; the main street descending with the
ridge is scarcely safe for carriages; and the great road from London
through Truro to Falmouth, passing directly across the ridge, has to
go up and then down through streets so steep and narrow, and in parts
so turned, as to make the safe-passage of the mail-coach a matter of
wonder; these defects have been, however, completely remedied by a
road carried round the point and accommodated with a drawbridge; thus
reducing the road to a level, and preserving the communication by
water; this improvement was made about the year 1830.

  This parish measures 2,271 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815
            The Parish   £.3951 0 0 }
            The Town       5117 0 0 }        9068    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831,
            The Parish      584 3 0 }
            The Town       1162 8 0 }        1746   11    0

  Population,  { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
    The Parish {    624   |    714   |    745   |    969
    The Town   {   2324   |   2713   |   2933   |   3521
               {   -------+----------+----------+---------
               {   2948   |   3427   |   3678   |   4490
    giving an increase on the Parish of 55⅓, on the Town 51½,
      on both 52¼,――per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. John Sheepshanks, collated by
    the Bishop of Exeter in 1824.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The western side of this parish skirts along the boundary of the
granite of Mabe; but it does not extend on this rock, with the
exception of a small triangular space near Chywoon, at its northern
corner. The rest of the parish lies on felspar rocks, both slaty and
massive; some of which contain hornblende, whence it passes into green
stone.

These felspar rocks, when they are disintegrated, afford a soil which
is covered with luxuriant vegetation, forming a striking contrast with
the utter barrenness of the adjacent granite.




GORAN.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north St. Ewe,
east Mevaguisey, south the British Channel. By this name it was taxed
in Domesday Roll, 20th William I. 1087. Also in the Inquisition of the
Bishops of Lincoln, &c. into the value of Cornish benefices, 1294,
Ecclesia Sancti Goran in Decanatu de Powdre, was valued in vi_l._
xiii_s._ iiii_d._ Vicar ibidem, xxvi_s._ viii_d._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition, 1521, it was rated by the same name of Goran at 20_l._
The patronage in the Bishop of Exeter, who endowed it; and when it was
made a Vicarage reserved to him and his successors 100_l._ per annum
rent out of the garb, or sheaf, which is in the possession of
Ratcliff. The Incumbent Shapter. And the parish rated to the 4_s._ per
pound Land Tax, 1696, temp. William III. by the name of Goran, 317_l._
14_s._ This, undoubtedly, was an endowed church before the Norman
Conquest, or, at least, a privileged manor, since it appears from that
time to this it hath not admitted of any mutation of name.

Goran-hoane, in this parish, signifies Goran-haven, bay, winding of
the sea, or harbour. A place much frequented by ships, boats, barges,
and lighters, for fishing and carrying and re-carrying fish, goods,
and merchandizes; and wherein is a convenient quay, or landing-place,
for that purpose, made secure by a considerable promontory of land
that shoots far out into the sea on the west side thereof, commonly
called (for what reason I have not learned) the Dead-man; which forms
a large bay, or winding bosom of the sea, on the east, betwixt it and
Ram Head, twenty miles distant; and such another west, to the Lizard
Point, at a like distance, all notable and well-known places, and
sea-marks to such mariners as navigate the British Channel in those
parts. In this haven town is still extant the ruins of an ancient free
chapel, wherein God was duly worshipped in former ages by the
inhabitants of the place.

The barton of Bo-drig-ham, or Bod-rig-an, also Botrigan (for in
British _d_ and _t_ are indifferently used and pronounced for each
other) gave name and origin to an old family of gentlemen surnamed de
Bodrigham, or Bodrigan, also Botrigan, who flourished here in great
fame, wealth, and reputation for several descents; and in particular
here lived Otho de Bodrigan, temp. 17th Edward II. of whom we read in
Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 51: viz. “Otto de Bodrugan peregrinatus
est ad San. Jacobum licentia Domini Regis;” i. e. Otho de Bodrigan, by
license of our Lord the King, is gone a pilgrimage to St. James; that
is to say, to the apostle St. James’s Church, at Compostella, in
Spain; who had for his fellow-traveller Radolphus de Belloprato, “qui
peregrinatus est cum Ottone de Bodrigan, cum licentia Regis, pro se et
duobus valectis;” that is to say, Ralph of the fair meadow, who by
license of the King for himself and two servants, or young gentlemen,
is gone a pilgrimage with Otho of Bodrigan. And of those it follows,
in the same page, “isti prænominati habent 40 libras terræ et redditus
per ann.;” that is to say, held by the tenure of knight’s service.

This Otho de Bodrigan, Sheriff of Cornwall, 3d Richard II. anno Dom.
1400, gave for his arms (as appears yet on the door of this house),
Argent, three bends or bendlets Gules. And as a further testimony
thereof, Nicholas Upton, in his Latin Manuscript of Heraldry, written
before printing was invented (now in my custody), said of his son,
1440, “Monsieur William Bodrigham port de Argent trois bends de
Gules;” who dying without issue, his two sisters became his heirs; the
one married to Champernowne, of Halewin, or Haleworth, who in her
right held in this place by the tenure of knight’s service, 3d Henry
IV. a Knight’s fee of land (Carew’s Survey of Cornwall).

His other sister, as tradition saith, was married to Trenowith, who
thereupon discontinued his own paternal name and arms, viz. in a field
Argent, on a fess Sable, three chevrons transverse (to the dexter) of
the Field; and assumed those of Bodrigan. He had issue by her Henry
Trenowith, or Bodrigham, temp. Henry VI. who married Jane, sixth
daughter of William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, slain 8th Edward IV.
1469, the relict of Thomas Viscount Lisle, and by her had issue. He
was knighted by King Edward IV. or King Richard III. by the name of
Sir Henry Bodrigham; who siding with King Richard III. at the battle
of Bosworth Field (where he, the said King Richard, was slain by the
Earl of Richmond’s soldiers), he was therefore, with many others,
attainted of treason against King Henry VII.; and in order to shun
justice he made his escape after the battle aforesaid, and secretly
repaired to this place, where he was kept close for a season, but not
so private but King Henry’s officers got notice thereof, and at an
appointed time beset the same in quest of him; which he understanding,
by a back-door fled from thence, and ran down the hills to the sea
cliff near the same, the officers pursuing so quick after him that he
could not possibly make his escape. As soon therefore as he came to
the cliff, about a hundred feet high, he leaped down into the sea,
upon the little grassy island there, without much hurt or damage;
where instantly a boat which he had prepared in the cove, attended him
there, which transported him to a ship that carried him into France.
Which astonishing fact, and place, is to this day well known and
remembered by the name of Harry Bodrigan’s leap, or jump. But
notwithstanding his own escape beyond the seas, this lordship and his
whole estate were forfeited and seized by King Henry VII. for
attainder of treason; and the greatest part thereof he settled upon
Sir Richard Edgcumb and his heirs for ever; whose posterity are still
in possession thereof. This Sir Richard Edgcumb, not long before, on
suspicion of being confederated with the Earl of Richmond against King
Richard III. (as tradition saith), was shrewdly sought after and
pursued by means of this very Sir Henry Bodrigan, in order to be taken
into custody, who from his house at Cotehele, made also a wonderful
escape thence, and got into France, to the Earl of Richmond; of which
see more in Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 114 (p. 270, Lord
Dunstanville’s edition), so unavoidable a thing is fortune or destiny.

Tradition tells us that there was great discord and variance between
the families of Bodrigan and the knightly family of the Haleps of
Lammoran, either upon account of private affronts or grudges, or upon
the different interests or factions, and wars between the houses of
York and Lancaster, wherein they were associated and engaged against
each other, so that as often as they met between themselves and
servants some combat or battle ensued, whereby blood was shed and the
peace broken; and they often came to each other’s gates armed in
defiance on horseback.

At Tre-garden lived John de Tregarthyn, temp. Edward I. how long
before I know not; after which his posterity in this place married
with the great inheritrixes of Pever, Chamberlayne, and Hendower, of
Court, in Branell, by which last, by the Cornwalls of that place, they
were lineally descended from Richard Earl of Cornwall, King of the
Romans, by his concubine, Joan de Valletort, widow of Sir Alexander
Oakeston. (Vide ST. STEPHEN’S.) Certainly this was an ancient, rich,
and famous family in those parts, for it appears by their seats, or
pews, in Goran church, they had the precedence or right hand of the
seats pertaining to the great family of Bodrigan, as is yet to be
seen. Thomas Tregarthyn, Esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall, 7 Henry VII.
1492, who married Hendower aforesaid, and removed to Court, in St.
Stephen’s, in Branell. He had issue by her, John Tregarthyn, Esq. and
two daughters; Margaret, the eldest, married to Richard Whiteleigh, of
Efford, in Devon, Esq. Sheriff of that county 16th Henry VII.; from
whose two daughters and heirs the Grenvilles of Stowe, and the Halses
late of Efford aforesaid, and Fentongallan, in Cornwall, are lineally
descended. Catherine, the second daughter of Thomas Tregarthyn, was
married to John Carmenow, of Fentongollan, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall
5th Henry VIII. whose posterity are extinct.

John Tregarthyn, Esq. aforesaid, son of Thomas, married Jane, daughter
of Thomas Trethyrfe, Esq. and had issue by her four daughters that
became his heirs; Mary married to Degory Grenvill, of Penheale, Esq.;
Jane to Tripcony, who passed those lands to Richard Trevanion, Esq.
(ancestor to Richard Trevanion, now in possession of this place);
Margaret, married to George Tanner, of Cullumbton, Esq. to whose share
and partage the manor of Court and Branell, in St. Stephen’s, fell;
Joan married to John Kellaway, of Egge, in Devon, Esq.; after his
death to Wadham of Merryfield, in Somerset, as appears from her
tombstone in Branscombe church, Devonshire, where is to be read and
seen those words:

“Here lyeth the body of a virtuous and ancient gentlewoman, descended
of the ancient house of the Plantagenets, some time of Cornwall,
namely, Joan, one of the daughters and coheirs of John Tregarthin, of
Tregarthyn, Esq.; she was first married to John Kellaway, Esq. who had
by her much issue. After his death she was married to John Wadham, of
Meryfield, in the county of Somerset, Esq. by whom she had children.
She lived a virtuous and godly life, and died in an honourable age, in
the year of our Lord 1581.” Now because this dark phrase, “descended
of the house of the Plantagenets,” needs a clavis to unlock it, let
the reader view the history of St. Stephen’s in Branell, and St.
Stephen’s by Saltash, and he shall find one that will do it
effectually. The arms of Tregarthin, whose name and whole family is
now extinct, were, Argent, a chevron between three escallops Sable.

The present possessor of this barton is Richard Trevanion, Esq. that
married Bond, of Earth; who had issue by her one only daughter,
married to Peter Major, of Foye, merchant, now in possession thereof,
whose names are the same as the Trevanions of Caryhayes.

Trewoola, Tre-wolla, or Tre-wole, gave name and origin to an old
family of gentlemen surnamed de Trewolla; who, in allusion to their
names, gave for their arms, Sable, three owls. This estate, in the
latter end of the reign of Charles II. was sold to Charles Trevanion,
of Cary-Hayes, Esq. for 900_l._ by John Trewolla, gentleman,
attorney-at-law, which was the last parcel of land Trewolla had to
sell of a considerable estate elsewhere, formerly sold by his
ancestors; and this place was so depressed with mortgages, statutes,
and judgments, that the whole consideration-money fell much short of
paying his creditors, and the incumbrances that were upon it; so that,
in order to make a clear title to the purchaser, several of Trewolla’s
creditors came to a loss, and in particular, James Hals, of Merthyr,
Gent. and Martha his wife, who had a statute staple for 700_l._ on
those lands, who, to comply with Trewolla’s bad circumstances, on Mr.
Trevanion’s paying them 250_l._ he and his wife levied a fine thereon,
and executed a deed, then declaring the uses thereof to be for the
only use of the said Charles Trevanion, Esq. his heirs and assigns for
ever.

In this parish, at ――――, was the dwelling of my very kind friend Dr.
James Gibbs, third son of James Gibbs, Vicar of this parish, who had
his education in Exeter College, as a servitor to his kinsman Mr.
Davis, son to Dr. Davis late of Plymouth; where, after he had taken
his Bachelor’s degree, he declared for the study of physic in Oxford;
and soon after, to better his study and experience, went with the said
Mr. Davis into France, and fixed at Montpelier, where he practised
physic (and also surgery in an hospital, as himself informed me) for
several years; afterwards in the College of Physicians there took his
degree of Doctor of that science; and, lastly, returned to this place,
where he practised physic with admirable care, skill, and success, and
through multitudes of patients and moderate fees, hath purchased a
considerable estate. Since the writing hereof this gentleman, to the
great grief and loss of his country, departed this life of the
hemorrhoides sickness; and before his death (who for many years had
been his patient, to the great benefit of my health, by God’s
blessing, after the endeavours of all other physicians proved
ineffectual,) left me this legacy,――that if I myself or friends were
sick, and had occasion to make use of physic, that we should in all
distempers make use only of the common, plain, and natural remedies.

Anthony Wills, of this parish, Gent. farmer of the sheaf thereof,
having by misfortune much incumbered his estate with debts, quitted
the same at such time as the Prince of Orange landed with his forces
at Torbay, and presented himself and his six or seven sons to that
Prince, for soldiers of war in his army; which proposal was graciously
accepted; and they were all posted as officers of command in his
bands, or troops. And after the Coronation of this Prince, King
William III. they followed him in all his Flanders and Irish wars
against King James II. and King Lewis XIV. and discharged their trusts
with such great care, faithfulness, valour, and conduct, that (as I am
informed,) before their deaths they all arrived to the dignities of
Captains, and some of them to the authority or commands of Majors,
Colonels, and one of them to become a standing Major-General of the
field. Who afterwards, about the year A.D. 1714, being made principal
commander of the army and troops of horse of King George the First,
against the Pretender’s (James Henry Edward Stewart,) army at Preston,
in Lancashire, where, after a furious, violent, and bloody battle with
them, he obtained the victory over that pretended Prince’s forces; for
which fact, and other noble deeds, he was created a Baronet of
England, and is since made General of all the land forces in England
next the King, his salary amounting to 7000_l._ per annum, as reported.


TONKIN.

For the name, I take it to be a contraction of St. Gordian, pronounced
in Cornwall St. Gorian, who having been, like St. Paul, a violent
prosecutor of the Christians, became a proportionably zealous convert,
and was beheaded at Rome in the year 341.

A tradition in the parish, nevertheless, assigns the guardianship of
this church to St. Gorien, or Coren, one of the missionaries from
Ireland who accompanied St. Perran.

The name of Trevennen, or Tremenen, probably the town of birth, in
reference to its fertility, belonged to the Priory of Tywardrith, and
formed a part of the lands given by Henry VIII. to the Duchy in
exchange for the manor of Wallingford.

Adjoining to Trevennen, and within the manor, is Trevasens, which was
long the seat of a family of the same name, but passed to the Hoblyns
of Nanswydan, in St. Columb, through an heiress.

Polgorror was heretofore a country residence of the Provost of
Glasnith College, at Penryn, to which the great tithes were
impropriated. This place, with the great tithes and the advowson of
the vicarage, now belong to the bishopric of Exeter.

Adjoining to this is Treveor, the great town, or dwelling, formerly
the seat of Treveors; and the parishioners still talk of Sir Henry
Treveor, who lived here; and a part of his house is yet standing.

Pennore, or Penarth. I take nore to signify the same as in Saxon, a
promontory; and that it is here applied to a point jutting out into
the sea, namely, to the Dead-man, which is separated from the village
by a double intrenchment, yet pretty entire, running from cliff to
cliff, and cutting off about an hundred acres of coarse ground. The
intrenchment is about twenty feet broad and twenty-four feet high in
most places; but the outer wall is the least high. The people call it
Thica Vosa, which is the Vallum, and the Hack and Cast, fabling it to
be the work of a giant, who performed the whole in one night. They
show also a hole in the cliff which opens into a hollow below, formed
by the sea; and the people relate that this giant growing unwell,
applied to a physician, who, that he might rid the world of such a
monster, bled him near this spot, and recommended him to let the blood
flow into this hole till it became full. The giant did so, and bled
himself to death, when his body fell over on a rock, still called the
giant’s house. The hole thus attempted to be filled with blood is
denominated from the immense quantity of ivy growing round it.

The church is placed very conveniently in the middle of the parish. It
is well built, with a handsome square tower of hewn moor stone, with
four tunable bells; and by reason of its high situation this church is
seen from a great distance. It consists of a large lofty nave, one
south aile of the same length, and two cross ailes to the north, of
which one is but small. In the chancel, near the north wall, before
the communion table, is a plain marble stone, on which are seen the
hollows where the figure of a woman kneeling, with arms, inscription,
&c. must have been inlaid. Tradition calls it the tomb of Lady
Brannell, but who this Lady Brannell was is unknown, although some
conjectures are formed of her belonging to the family of Tregarthen.

Against the eastern wall, by the window, is a comely monument of black
marble, to Richard Edgecombe, of Bodrigan, Esq. son of Sir Richard
Edgecombe, of Mount Edgecombe, Knight, who died Nov. 5, 1755.


THE EDITOR.

The manor of Trevascus belongs by purchase to Mr. Slade Gulby, who
resides on the barton of Trevenion, which has been in his family since
the time of the Tudors.

Treveor belonged to the late Rev. Dr. Wynne, and was given by him to
Mr. Pendarves. On this barton may be seen one of those round
entrenchments usually denominated castles in the West of England. It
is at least doubtful in most cases whether any permanent dwelling was
ever connected with them.

The barton of Bodrigan has descended in the family of Edgecombe since
the time of Henry VII.

It is generally apprehended that Sir Henry Bodrigan was present at the
battle of Bosworth Field; and that, having escaped from thence to
Cornwall, he endeavoured to defend his property in a private house
against Edgecombe and Trevenion, who, in despoiling and endeavouring
to take his life, did no more than he would have done, had the fortune
of arms inclined the other way; or than what he actually did against
Sir Richard Edgecombe a few years before at Cotehele. Such are the
effects of civil wars, when――

  Lance to lance, and horse to horse!
  Long years of havoc urge their destined course,
  And through the kindred squadrons mow their way.

Bodrugon’s property was mainly divided between Edgecumbe and
Trevanion, who are also believed to have fought against King Richard
in Bosworth Field, and then to have attacked Sir Richard Bodrugon near
his own house after the defeat at that place. He effected his retreat
to a vessel by the extraordinary effort already mentioned, and left
the shores of England never to return. He had a brother settled in the
north of Devon, but his line became soon extinct.

  Goran measures 4,596 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3487    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           950    0    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {  1009   |   1116   |   1203   |   1205
    giving an increase of somewhat less than 19½ per cent. in
      30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. David Jenkins, collated by the
    Bishop of Exeter in 1824.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish forms a continuation of the calcareous series of St. Ewe.
At the Deadman point the rock is for the most part siliceous,
affording an example of the quartz rock of Dr. Macculloch.




GRADE.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and has upon the north Ruan
Major, west Mullyan, east Ruan Minor, south Landawidnick. At the time
of the Norman conquest this district was taxed under the jurisdiction
of Lisart.

In the taxation of benefices in Cornwall, towards the Pope’s annats,
made by the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia Sancti
Grade in decanatu de Kerryer, was valued lx_s._ in Wolsey’s
Inquisition, 1521, 11_l._ 1_s._ 5_d._ The patronage in the Bishop of
Exeter; the incumbent Symons; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per
pound Land Tax, 1696, 58_l._ 12_s._


TONKIN.

This parish takes its name from its titular female saint, St. Grada.
In the taxation of 1294, in the 20th year of Edward I. it is valued by
the name of Ecclesia Sanctæ Gradæ.


THE EDITOR.

The etymologies offered by Mr. Hals appear so very improbable that
they are omitted. If any such person as St. Grade ever existed, she
must have been among the tribe of early missionaries, of whom no
traces are left except that of their names being affixed to churches.

This parish has within its limits the manor and barton of Erisey, the
seat of a very respectable family bearing the same name, who gave for
their arms, Sable, a chevron between three griffins segreant Or. The
name has been extinct above a century, and the barton belongs by
purchase to Lord Falmouth. Several monuments of different members of
the family remain in the church.

The advowson of the living belongs by purchase to Mr. Rogers, of
Penrose. The parish feast is kept on the nearest Sunday to St. Luke’s
day. The family of Lord Wodehouse, through his marriage with Sophia
Berkeley, niece of Lord Berkeley, of Stratton, are supposed to
represent the Eriseys.

  This parish measures 2,005 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1357    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           208    2    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    320  |     306  |     355  |     306
    giving a decrease of nearly 4½ per cent. in 30 years; but
      with unusual anomalies in intermediate enumerations.
  Present Rector, the Rev. John Peter, instituted in 1818.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The portion of this parish around the church, and the various
insulated portions, are situated on magnesian rocks; the most abundant
variety of which is serpentine. This rock is generally of a red
colour, but this is evidently in some cases derived from a partial
chemical change. In its perfect state this serpentine is generally of
a dark-green, with shining scales of diallage, which are commonly of a
bronze colour, and at other times of a fine green. The serpentine at
Cadgwith may be seen to pass gradually into a schistose rock of a dark
bottle-green, and very glassy and spangled on the surface of its
lamellæ. This slate is generally called greenstone, but it differs
therefrom, and consequently requires a distinct appellation. At Cagar
there is a quarry in the serpentine; and at Kennick Cove adjoining,
many varieties of these rocks may be obtained.




GULVAL.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the north Ludgvan,
south the Mount’s Bay, west Maddaran, east St. Hilary.

In the time of William the Conqueror’s survey of lands, anno Dom.
1087, this parish, I suppose, passed in tax under the jurisdiction of
Ludgvan. In the Inquisition and Taxation of Benefices in Cornwall, by
the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia de Laneseley, in
decanatu de Penwith, appropriata priori Sancti Germani, is valued
lxvi_s._ viii_d._ Vicar ibidem, xx_s._ At which time it seems it was
but a Vicarage church; the garb impropriated, though since restored.
Neither was the name of Gulval then mentioned. However, in Wolsey’s
Inquisition, 1521, it is rated by the name of Gulval, also Laneseley,
6_l._ 11_s._ 0½_d._ The patronage was formerly in the Prior of St.
German’s, now in the crown. The incumbent Penhellick; and the parish
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, by the name of Gulval,
120_l._

This manor of Laneseley, in this parish, was, in the time of Richard
I. and King John, the lands of the family surnamed De Als, now Hals,
so called from the barton and dismantled manor of Als, now Alse and
Alesa, in Buryan, as tradition saith, or Beer Alseton, Alston, in
Devon, in possession of Trevanion and others, whereof they were lords;
and in particular William de Als, in the beginning of the reign of
King Henry III. that married Mary, the daughter of Francis de Bray,
was possessed thereof; father of Simon de Alls, who lived at Halsham,
in Yorkshire (from him denominated), that married Jane, daughter of
Thomas de Campo Arnulpho (now Champernown), Sheriff of York second,
third, sixth, and seventh years of King Henry III. Anno Dom. 1222, as
appears from the catalogue of those Sheriffs, and the Hals’s allowed
pedigree, 1483; from which also it is manifest, by an authentic deed
or record therein, yet legible, that the said Simon for the health and
salvation of his soul, his wife’s, his ancestors, and other relations,
gave the said manor of Laneseley to the Prior of St. German’s, his
canonical brothers, and their successors for ever, in these words.

In nomine Domini, &c. Ego Simon de Als, pro salute animæ meæ, et Janæ
uxoris meæ, et parentum meorum, dono et concedo manerium de Laneseley,
in comitatu Cornubiæ, Priori Sancti Germani, et fratribus canonicis,
et successoribus eorum, cum dominicis redditibus, &c. et omnibus
ibidem appendentibus, terra, sylva, pratos, et aquam, &c. ut habeant,
teneant, et possideant in perpetuum, &c.; dat vicesimo sexto die
Augusti, anno regni nostri Regis Henrici tertii post conquestum
octavo. Hiis testibus, Thoma de Tracye, Henrico de la Pombre,
Reginaldo de Valtorta, Roberto de Cheni, Radolpho de Esse. This grant,
or donation, was in the year 1266. (See Lelant.)

By virtue whereof the Prior of St. German’s and his successors were
possessed of this manor from that time till the 26th Henry VIII. 1536,
when that Priory was dissolved, and the lands thereof vested in the
crown. At which time King Henry VIII. gave the lands thereof to
Champernown, Beaumont, Barry, and others; and to Beaumont’s and
Barry’s share fell this manor of Laneseley; who parted with it either
by purchase or in marriage with his daughter, to John Tripcony, about
the year 1565; whose son, John Tripcony, having by riot and excess
comparatively wasted his paternal estate, mortgaged this manor of
Laneseley to Sir Nicholas Hals, of Fentongollan, knight, about the
year 1620, who was lineally descended from Simon de Als, aforesaid,
and died seised thereof about the year 1637. After his decease his
unthrifty son and heir, John Hals, became possessed thereof, who
assigned the mortgage thereof for 500_l._ to one Mr. Downes, A.D.
1655; and soon after, having spent his whole paternal estate
elsewhere, went beyond the seas, and was never since heard of to this
day; leaving issue, by Jane Arundel his wife, Major Thomas Hals, of
Hals’s Savana, in Clarendon parish and province, in Jamaica, who had
issue Thomas Hals, Esq. his son and heir.

After the departure of the said John Hals beyond the seas, the said
Mr. Downes assigned over the mortgage of the premises to one Mr.
Collwell, a scrivener of London; who dying soon after, his son, Thomas
Collwell, became seised thereof; and after his death his widow, who by
her last will and testament (as executrix of her said husband,)
conveyed the said manor to Charles Bonython, Esq.――Spur, Longeville,
and others, in trust, now in possession thereof, 1700; before which
time, between the said Downes and Collwell, on pretence of the equity
of redemption reserved in Downes, John Hals being beyond the seas, and
that the mortgage money to Collwell was satisfied out of the profits
of these lands; and a cross bill of Collwell’s against Downes,
alleging the contrary, and to foreclose him; happened so many tedious
and costly Chancery suits as comparatively undid them both. But,
maugre all their endeavours, the old titles of Tripcony and Hals were
foreclosed by a decree in Chancery, betwixt Downes and Collwell, in
Hillary term 1689, yet extant and to be seen.

This manor of Laneseley, for goodness of land, jurisdiction, court
leet, fishing craft, and royalties over all that part of the sea of
the Mount’s Bay, between Longbridge and Chiandower, near Penzance, may
equal, if not surpass, any other manor in those parts of its value,
which is now scarcely worth 300_l._ per annum, though in former ages
it was of far larger extent; for in the survey of Cornish acres,
tempore Edward II. (Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 46, p. 131, of Lord
Dunstanville’s edition), it was numbered in the Exchequer to contain
twenty-eight acres, that is, about six thousand statute acres;[4]
every ancient Cornish acre being sixty statute acres of land; the
contents of the whole now not exceeding a thousand statute acres,
which lies in Gulval and Ludgvan.

In Fosses Moor, part of this manor of Lanesely, in this parish, is
that well-known fountain called Gulval Well. To which place great
numbers of people, time out of mind, have resorted for pleasure and
profit of their health, as the credulous country people do in these
days, not only to drink the waters thereof, but to inquire after the
life or death of their absent friends; where, being arrived, they
demanded the question at the well, whether such a person, by name, be
living, in health, sick, or dead; if the party be living, and in
health, the still quiet water of the well-pit, as soon as the question
is demanded, will instantly bubble or boil up as a pot, clear
christaline water; if sick, foul and puddle waters; if the party be
dead, it will neither bubble, boil up, or alter its colour or still
motion. However, I can speak nothing of the truth of those
supernatural facts from my own sight or experience, but write from the
mouths of those who told me they had seen and proved the veracity
thereof. Finally, it is a strong and courageous fountain of water,
kept neat and clean by an old woman of the vicinity, to accommodate
strangers for her own advantage, by blazing the virtues and divine
qualities of those waters.


TONKIN.

After copying from Hals, Mr. Tonkin adds of Lanistley manor:――It
extendeth throughout the parish of Gulval from the Moreps to the
Gundrons; that is to say, from above the sea to the Down Hills; it
extendeth also through a part of the parish of Ludgvan.

At Kenneggy is the dwelling, by lease (the fee being in his elder
brother, William Harris, of Hayne, Esq.), of Christopher Harris,
Gentleman, an attorney-at-law, who married a daughter of John Foote,
of Truro, Esq. His elder brother, who married the daughter of John St.
Aubyn, Esq. of Clowance, in the parish of Crowan, is now in possession
of Hayne, near Lifton, in Devonshire, having succeeded to it on the
decease of Sir Arthur Harris, jun. the last heir male of the elder
branch. On removing to Hayne he leased Kenneggy to his younger brother
aforesaid; who, by reason of the elder brother’s yet want of issue, is
likely to become his heir. The arms of Harris are, Sable, within a
bordure three crescents Argent.

Mr. Edward Llwyd, in his letter to me, would have this parish to take
its name from the inscription on the stone in Maddern parish,
“Riolabran: Cunoval: Fil:” and that Cunoval is turned by corruption
into Guloval, for that he found many such instances in Wales.

I should be glad to agree with so great a critic, but since there is a
saint, or bishop, whose name comes very near to this――St. Gunwall,
whose memory the church celebrates on the 6th of June, I cannot
forbear fancying, especially the humour of the country being
considered, that he is the patron and the namer of this parish.


THE EDITOR.

There cannot be any reasonable doubt of St. Gunwall having bestowed
his name on this parish, more especially when the prophetic well is
taken into account, since saints scarcely ever failed of imparting
some supernatural quality to their favourite streams.

St. Gunwall was, moreover, a Briton, and is stated to have been in
Cornwall.

Saint Gudwall, or Gunwall, was born in Wales about the year 500. Being
entirely devoted to God, he collected eighty-eight monks in a little
island called Plecit, being no more than a rock surrounded by water.
For some reason, however, he abandoned this establishment, and passed
by sea into Cornwall; and from thence he went into Devonshire, where
he betook himself to the most holy, perfect, and useful state of a
solitary anchorite; at length, however, again emerging, he sailed into
Britany, and there succeeded St. Malo, as Bishop of that see, although
he is said even then to have dwelt in a solitary cell, and to have
died there at a very advanced age. His relics have been widely
distributed, and various places in France have been called by his
name.

Mr. Whitaker explains the ancient name of this parish, Lanisley, by
Lan and Ishei, low, or lower, the low church, which appears to agree
very well with the situation.

The great tithes certainly belonged to the Priory at St. German’s, for
in the returns made to Henry VIII. of the property belonging to them,
appears――

Gulval, decimæ Garbarum, £10. 6_s._ 8_d._

These tithes, since the law-suits mentioned by Mr. Hals, have passed
by purchase into the possession of the Beauchamps of Gwenap, and now
belong to the two daughters and coheiresses of the late Mr. John
Beauchamp.

The vicarage, although it has risen into one of the most valuable to
be found in that district, in consequence of modern improvements, and
of its being situated near Penzance, is yet rated under twenty pounds
a-year in the King’s Books, and therefore passes by the presentation
of the Lord Chancellor. Two Mr. Pennerks, father and son, held this
living in succession. It was then given, in 1789, to Mr. John Cole,
afterwards Doctor in divinity and Rector of Exeter College, and his
successor is the present Vicar, the Rev. Robert Dillon.

Kenegie passed from Mr. William Harris, of Hayne, accordingly as Mr.
Tonkin had conjectured, to the family of his brother, Mr. Christopher
Harris; and the family becoming extinct in the male line by the death
of this gentleman’s grandson in 1775, by much the largest part of the
estate went, under the provisions of a will, to Mr. William Arundell,
then resident at Crane, in Camborne, who assumed the name of Harris;
but his grandson choosing to fix his permanent residence at a very
handsome seat of his own creating near Lifton, parted with all his
Cornish property; and Kenegie now belongs, in fee, to the farmer, who
had occupied it at an annual rent. This place having formerly belonged
to the family of ―――― Tripcony, who bore for their arms, Argent, three
rabbits passant Sable, and kynin and kyninger being the Cornish names
for a rabbit, I cannot but suspect that kynneggy, or kenegie, must
have some relation to the name of Tripeney.

Trevailer is the place next of importance in this parish. It has been
long the residence of a very respectable family, the Veales. They are
said to have come from Gloucestershire, their ancestor having been the
first Protestant Vicar of Gulval. The Reverend William Veale, the
present possessor, has rebuilt the house; the second brother of his
grandfather, Mr. George Veale, made a large fortune at Penzance, by
the practice of the law and by success in mines, which became divided
between three daughters who married Hichens, Baines, and Jenkins. Mr.
William Veale has married the only daughter of the Rev. Richard
Gerveys Grylls, of Helston.

But the most beautiful place in this parish, and one of the greatest
ornaments to the whole neighbourhood, is Rosemorron, the Vale of
Blackberries, formed by Mr. George John. This gentleman having married
Jane, the eldest daughter of Mr. Arundall, who assumed the name of
Harris on succeeding to the large fortune of that family, and having
been for many years at the head of his profession in Penzance, has at
length retired to this delightful spot in the summer months. Nor have
his decorations of the country been confined to one situation; he has
shewn, by extensive plantations at Try, that the most elevated and
barren tracts, even on a granite soil, may be rendered useful and
decorative by the growth of trees.

The lower part of the parish, adjoining to the sea, is fertile in the
highest degree, from the village of Chiandower (the house by the
water), through Pendrea to the Church Town. And the vallies, abounding
in trees, rival those of any country. Chiandower is also become a
place worthy of the adjacent scenery, through the taste and the
exertions of Messrs. Bolitho, who, in making ample fortunes, have
benefited the country still more than themselves by promoting every
species of productive industry. The parish feast does not certainly
corroborate the supposition of the patron saint; it is held on the
nearest Sunday to the 12th of November, the day of St. Martin, the
first Pope of that name, a native of Todi, in Tuscany, and elected
Pope in the year 649. He assembled in the same year the sixth council
of Lateran, where the heresy of the Monothelites was condemned; but
the schismatic Emperor, Constans, sent Olympius, his chamberlain, to
Rome, to support the obnoxious sect, who arrived there while the
council were deliberating; and failing in his attempts to divert them
from supporting the orthodox faith, he suborned a person to murder the
Pope, but in attempting to execute the atrocious deed the assassin was
miraculously struck blind. Yet, nevertheless, Constans persevered in
his speculative errors and in his wicked conduct, by causing St.
Martin to be seized, and after suffering many casualties, to be
banished to the Tauric Chersonesus, where he died in 655.

His relics were afterwards brought to Rome, and deposited in the
church of St. Martin of Tours, on the 12th of November, which, from
thenceforward, was observed as a festival to his honour.

The day of St. Martin of Tours, the popular patron of beggars, happens
to be on the day before, and several parishes give their feasts on the
nearest Sunday to November the 11th, but Gulval alone honours the Pope
and Saint.

  Gulval measures 3950 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5170    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           406    8    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   1076  |    1224  |    1353  |    1467
    giving an increase of nearly 36½ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The northern part of this parish rests on granite, which is for the
most part a coarse crystalline rock, containing very large porphyritic
crystals of felspar. The granite is, however, in some places very
fine-grained, and near its juncture with the slate abounds in shorl.
The schistose rocks composing the southern part of the parish, have a
basis of compact felspar, assuming various appearances according as it
is more or less siliceous; those rocks are often beautifully marked
with crystalline patches and veins of actynolite, as may be seen in
the rocks on the sea shore, and they are traversed here and there by
beds of felspar porphyry, into which they gradually pass.


     [4] Surely sixteen or seventeen hundred. ED.




GUNWALLO.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon the north the
Loopoole and part of Mawgan, east Cury, south Mullyan, west the
British Channel, or Ocean.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this district was taxed either
under the jurisdiction of Lisart, now Lisard, or Trevery. In the value
of Benefices towards the Pope’s Annates made by the Bishops of Lincoln
and Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia Sancti Winwalli, i. e. the church of
the holy, victorious, or conquering Wallo, in decanatu de Kerryer, was
rated iiii_l._ iii_s._ iiii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it goes
in value and consolidation with Breock, Germo, and Cury, by the name
of the Vicarage of Wynnanton, i. e. the conquering, or victorious
town; all doubtless referring to the conquests of King Gunwallo, or
Dunwallo. The patronage, I take it, was formerly in the Prior of St.
Michael’s Mount, or the Duke of Cornwall, who endowed it. It is now in
the King, or Duke; the incumbent Trewinard, and parish rated to the
4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, temp. William III. 53_l._ 9_s._ 8_d._
by the name of Gunwallo.

The manor of Gunwallowinton, a lordship in this parish, claimeth the
royalty and jurisdiction, by sea and land, over the whole parish, and
was formerly the lands of Carmenow, now of Arundell of Lanhearne, by
match with one of the daughters and heirs of that name.


TONKIN.

In this parish stands a circle of rude unwrought stones in the shape
of a wall heaped together, and called Earth.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Whitaker remarks in a note on Hal’s MS. that the name of this
parish is clearly derived from its patron saint, Winnwallo.

I find that Winwallo was the son of a petty Prince in Wales; who,
flying with his family from the Saxons, went into Britany, where he
acquired the habit of undergoing monastic austerities under the
guidance of St. Budock. He ultimately founded a monastery called
Landevenech, about three miles from Brest. He became the first Abbat,
and died on the 3d of March about the year 529. His body was buried at
Landevenech; but in after ages, when the northmen extended their
ravages to this part of the Continent, his relics were removed to
places of greater safety; and as an effectual security against an
entire loss, portions were preserved at St. Peter’s, at Blandinberg,
at Ghent, at Montreuil, and at other places.

The Celtic name has given origin to various pronunciations, and to as
many corresponding orthographies; the G and W at the beginning of
words are well known to take each the place of the other almost
without discrimination. In Picardy, where he is esteemed the patron,
Winwallo is changed into Vignevaley and Walovay; in Britany into
Guignole and Vennole; in other parts of France into Guingalois.

It is the more probable that St. Winwallo may be the patron saint of
this parish, and that he may have given it his name, since a parish in
the neighbourhood stands in that relation towards his teacher St.
Budock. The parish feast, however, is held on the last Sunday in
April, although St. Winwallo is honoured in the Roman calendar on the
third of March.

Mr. Lysons says that the manor of Wynyaton, or Winington, called by
Mr. Hals Gonwallowinton, was given about the year 1235, by Roger Earl
of Cornwall, in exchange for Bossiney, to Gervase de Harnington; from
whom it passed by an heiress to the family of Trevanthians, and again
in the same way to Roskymers. It ultimately belonged to the Arundells
till the general sale of all Lord Arundell’s property in Cornwall,
when this manor was purchased by Mr. John Rogers, of Penrose, near
Helston.

The church is situated among sandbanks, and very near the sea. In
those banks Captain Avery, the celebrated buccaneer, is reported to
have buried several chests of treasure previously to his leaving
England on the voyage from which he never returned. So strongly has
this opinion prevailed, that Mr. John Knill, collector of the customs
at St. Ives, procured, about the year 1770, a grant of treasure trove,
and expended some money in a fruitless search.

This gentleman is still remembered on account of his singularities,
and his having erected a pyramid on a hill near the town where he had
long resided.

In the churchyard of Gunwallo is a tombstone with the following
conceit:

  We shall die all,
  Shall die all we;
  Die all we shall,
  All we shall die.

  The parish measures 1175 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          1,405    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           150   14    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   216   |    206   |    252   |    284
    giving an increase of 31½ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish runs parallel with the sea shore from Poljew Cove to Loo
Bar. The shore, where the land lies low, is covered with banks of
siliceous sand, which near the church form an extensive down. At the
Cove the rocks consist of a blue glassy slate, and of a compost rock
of the same colour which decomposes into a white clay. Nearly the
whole of the cliff is a diluvial mass; the lower part of which, just
above high-water mark, is consolidated into a conglomerate sandstone,
apparently through the cementing medium of a solution of carbonate of
iron, derived from the percolation of rain-water through the bed of
ferruginous clay that forms the upper part of this deposit.




GWENAP.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Keryer, and hath upon the north, part of
Redruth, east Peranwell and Key, south Gluvius, west Stithians. That
this church was extant before the Norman Conquest is plain from the
name thereof, for in the Domesday Tax, 20th William I. 1087, it is
rated by the name of Gwenap. In the Inquisition into the value of
Cornish Benefices made by the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294,
Ecclesia Sancti Wenap in decanatu de Kerrier, is rated at vii_l._
Vicar ejusdem xxvi_s._ viii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, the
Vicarage of Wenap is valued 16_l._ 18_s._ 9_d._ The patronage in the
Bishop of Exeter, who endowed it. The incumbent Bishop; and the parish
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 148_l._ 3_s._ by the name
of Gwenap. The garb, or rectory, in Wright or Nicholls.

Trefyns (i. e. the springs of water, or fountains town,) came to
Beauchamp by marriage with the heiress of this name and land, where
they have ever since flourished in gentle degree. The present
possessor, William Beauchamp, Esq. that married Courtney of Trehane,
his father Boaden, his grandfather Tregoze, giveth for his arms, Vairy
Argent and Azure. The first progenitor of the tribe and name of
Beauchamp came into England a soldier under William the Conqueror, and
probably some of his posterity were planted in this province, from
whence those gentlemen are descended; especially if the name, Stephen
de Bellocampo, 40th Henry III. who held in Cornwall by tenure of
knight’s service 15_l._ per annum land and rents, may be interpreted
the same as Beauchamp (Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 40), for
otherwise verily I know not from what family of gentlemen those
Beauchamps are descended; since none other of that name give the same
arms as these do; for Guy de Beauchamp, Sheriff of Devon, 12th King
John, gave for his arms, Gules, a fess between three crosses bottony
Or; from whom are descended the Beauchamps of Bletsho and Hatch, in
Wiltshire. Beauchamp Earl of Warwick gave for his arms, Gules, a fess
between six cross-crosslets Or. William Beauchamp, Sheriff of Devon
18th Henry VI. that married the inheritrix of Henry de Ties, lord of
Alverton and Tywarnhayle, summoned to Parliament as a Baron temp.
Henry IV. gave for his arms, Gules, a fess between six martlets Or;
from whence I gather there were diverse families of those Beauchamps
heretofore in England, no way related in blood to each other. Query,
whether the arms of those gentlemen living in this place be not the
arms of Bochym, as I have been informed they are, which is Vaire
Argent and Azure.

Notwithstanding this place of Trefyns was heretofore denominated from
springs of water abounding there in winter season, yet I assure you
now in summer time, by reason of the tin-mines and subterranean adits
near it that carry those springs of water invisibly under ground,
water is very scarce and much wanting in those lands. It is also
called Trevense, and Trewince.

St. Dye chapel in this parish was heretofore a chapel of ease to
Gwenap; the tutelar guardian whereof is St. Dye, of Gaul, very famous
in that country for his piety and holy Christian living about the
fifth century, who held the faith in opposition to Arianism and
Pelagianism, then raging in the church. And there is a church in the
province of Lorraine still bearing his name. If it were as easy for
the Vicar to attend and perform divine service in this remote quarter
of the parish where this chapel is, as it is convenient to his
parishioners in the town of St. Dye, it had been doubtless still
applied to the end and use for which it was erected.

Not far from this place is that unparalleled and inexhaustible
tin-work called Paldys; i. e. the top or head of St. Dye’s Town, which
for above forty years’ space hath employed yearly from eight hundred
to a thousand men and boys, labouring for and searching after tin in
that place, where they have produced and raised up for that time
yearly, at least twenty thousand pounds worth of that commodity, to
the great enriching of the lords of the soil, the bound owners, and
adventurers in those lands.

Of those miners, or searchers for metals, hath Ovid written elegantly
in Latin verse, which sounds thus in English, tempore Augusti:――

  Men deep descend into the earth
  With mattock, shoul, and spade,
  And wicked wealth is digged up,
  Which mischiefs all hath made;
  Dame Nature did it hide and put
  Where gristly ghosts do dwell;
  So that the hurtful iron and
  The glittering gold from hell
  Produced is, more noisome than
  The other metal vile,
  Through foul desire whereof for aye
  Is virtue in exile.
  Shame, truth, and faith, are put to flight;
  Their place do those uphold,
  Both fraud, deceit, fell force, and wiles,
  And wicked love of gold,
  For which the laws are sold.
                     _Metamorph._ Lib. i. p. 138-150.

MEMORANDUM.――On Friday, 19th September, 1707, about four of the clock
in the afternoon, happened in those parts divers flashes of lightning
and cracks of thunder, which not only terrified the inhabitants
thereof, but after one of those cracks a ball of fire, or Jupiter’s
thunderbolt (as the Greeks called it), entered by the window into the
house of one John Kent, a carpenter of this parish, where he was
working, the windy force thereof instantly struck him dead on the
place, scalded his wife and two children in that room, then passed out
through the chimney wall, and so shattered the same that a great part
of it instantly fell to the ground.


TONKINS.

In this parish, on the top of a lofty mountain called Carne-mark, are
two or three stone tumuli, under which are doubtless interred the
bodies of some distinguished persons.

The right name of this parish is St. Wenep, a female saint, to whom
the parish is dedicated.


THE EDITOR.

Saint Wenep is, I believe, only remembered by the dedication of this
parish; but St. Dye is a personage of more consequence. He was a
native of France, and in the year 655 became Bishop of Nevres; but St.
Dye happened to live at a period when the prevalent fanaticism induced
persons to believe that the Author of all good was most gratified by
beholding the misery of his rational creatures, accompanied by their
voluntary debasements through ignorance and solitude below the level
of the brute creation. With this persuasion, St. Dye resigned his
bishopric, and founded a house for monks at a place called Jointures,
but retired himself to an anchorite cell. He is said to have died on
the 19th of June, 680.

The chapel, dedicated to St. Dye, in Gwenap, had long been in ruins;
but since the eager contest has grown up between the Establishment and
Dissenters for retaining or acquiring power through the media of
extensive education and proselytism, and Chapels, Meeting Houses, and
Schools have arisen all over England, St. Dye has seen a new and
spacious building displace the ruins that remained from former times.

The Beauchamps had removed from Trewince to Pengreap; where the family
became extinct in the male line about the year 1818, by the decease of
Mr. Joseph Beauchamp, who had lost his only son a few years before,
and the estate is now divided between the two daughters of his elder
brother, Mr. John Beauchamp.

Cornmarth has been already mentioned. Mr. Whitaker says that the true
name is Cornmarke, and that it means the Knight’s barrow.

On the southern declivity of Cornmarth is a large excavation, supposed
by some to have been made long ago for the exhibition of games, but by
others to owe its general form to the accidental running together of
an old mine. It is, at all events, admirably adapted to the purpose of
enabling a speaker to address an extremely large assembly; and the
late Mr. John Wesley has been distinctly heard by many thousands at a
time in Gwenap pit.

Scornier, which a few years since exhibited the appearance of a small
village, has now become perhaps the chief place in this parish. Mr.
John Williams, one of the most extensive and most successful managers
and adventurous miners of the present time, built here an excellent
house, and adorned it with the finest collection of Cornish minerals
ever brought together. Mr. Williams, after making a large fortune, has
retired at an advanced age, leaving several sons engaged in the same
pursuits with equal advantage to themselves and to the public; one of
whom has added a second splendid house to the village.

It is quite impossible for me to enter fully into a description of the
mines, which have continued in work on the most extensive scale from
the period when Mr. Leman commenced the modern system up to the
present time. It is said that no district of the same extent in any
part of the world ever produced so much riches.

Poldice was worked for tin about the commencement of the last century
by Mr. Hearle, of Penryn. The mine happened to have very little water,
and this was exhausted by rock and chain pumps moved by human labour.

Copper seldom appears near the surface, as is the case with tin; but
tin lodes out of granite frequently produce copper in depth. All the
lodes in Gwenap have done so, and in some places the mines have gone
to the depth of two hundred and thirty or forty fathoms from the
surface, more than two hundred fathoms under the level of the sea,
assisted by steam engines having working-cylinders ninety inches in
diameter and ten feet long.

The freehold of the land containing those mines is possessed in
undivided shares between several persons; Mr. Hearle had one-third,
that is now divided again into thirds between the descendants of three
daughters, Mr. Tremayne, Mr. Rodd, and Mr. Stephens.

The church in Gwenap is large in every dimension, but, what is very
unusual, the tower stands apart. One of our late historians very
justly complains of what he terms the “mangling of modern Vandalism,”
in alterations of the church; Venetian frames have been substituted
for stone mullions; windows of painted glass bearing the figures of
saints have been removed; and the screen, or rood-loft, of beautiful
workmanship has disappeared; modern deal seats have been introduced
throughout the church, and a glare of light on the white-washed walls
has completed the overthrow of very thing venerable.

The interior is divided into a nave, a chancel, and two side ailes,
supported on each side by seven handsome columns.

The burial-ground contains a monument of fine marble in memory of the
Beauchamps.

There is a tradition in the parish of monks having been established in
the church tower, and that a house now converted to an inn, was a part
of the building. No notice whatever is taken of such a monastery in
any authentic work. If therefore this tradition rests on any fact, the
house cannot have been more than an hostelry for friars.

  The parish measures 5,289 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         18,273    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                         3,329    9    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   4594  |    5303  |    6294  |    8539
    giving an increase of 86 per cent. in 30 years, and a numerical
      increase of three thousand nine hundred and forty-five persons.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. W. Marsh, presented by the Dean and Chapter
    of Exeter in 1825.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Gwenap has long been one of the most important mining districts of
Cornwall. Its western part rests on the same patch of granite as the
eastern part of Cornborne, the one stretching to the east and the
other to the west. The slate is also similar to that of Cornborne, and
like that it is traversed by numerous beds of porphyry, some of which,
in the vicinity of Burncoose, are of the most beautiful description,
containing well-defined crystals of felspar and of quartz.




GWENDRON.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon the north
Camburne, south Maugan in Meneage, east Stithiany, Constantine, west
Sithney.

In the taxation of benefices in Cornwall, as aforesaid, 1294, Ecclesia
Sancte Wendrone (I suppose together with Helston, its daughter
church,) in decanatu de Kerryer, is valued xvii_l._ vi_s._ viii_d._ In
Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it is valued, together with Helston, at
26_l._ 19_s._ 3_d._ The patronage formerly, as I am informed, in the
Hospital and Prior, or Governor, of St. John the Baptist, at Helston,
or the College of regular Canons at Glasnith, or Abbat of St.
Michael’s Mount; now Jago, and the Incumbent Jago. The rectory, or
sheaf, in Boscawen. And the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land
Tax, 1696, 174_l._ 8_s._ 4_d._

Trenithike, in this parish (i. e. the town of the bridge or ford,
leate or lake of waters). It is the dwelling of Sampson Hill, Esq. one
of his Majesty’s Commissioners for the Peace, that married Callmady,
the relict of Silly, and giveth for his arms, Or, a fess between two
chevrons Sable, which is the coat-armour of the ancient family of the
Seneschalls of this place, whose daughter and heir was married to the
gentleman’s ancestor now in possession thereof, as I am informed.

Query, whether these arms are not the same as given by Sir John Lisle,
knight, one of the first founders of the noble order of the Garter,
lord of the manor of Wilbraham, in the county of Cambridge, whose
posterity enjoy, as I take it, those lands and his arms to this day,
viz. in a field Or, a fess between two chevrons Sable.

In this parish, by the post road, or highway, are set up, in
perpendicular manner, about ten feet asunder in a line, nine large
moor stones commonly called the Nine Maids, or Virgin Sisters;
probably set up in memory of so many sister nuns heretofore interred
there.


TONKIN.

This church, although a Vicarage, is endowed with the sheaf over all
the southern part of the parish, which most abounds in grain. It
carries with it Helston in the same presentation. The patronage in Mr.
William Iago. The Incumbent Mr. John Jago. The sheaf not endowed in
the possession of Mr. Hugh Boscowen, of Tregothnan.

At Trenithike is the dwelling of Sampson Hill, Esq. a Commissioner of
the Peace, who married a sister of Joseph Colmady, of Longdon, in
Devonshire, and widow of Heale of Battlesford.

All the lands in this parish lie within the great duchy, lordship, and
manor of Helston in Kerrier, as it is named for distinction from
Helston in Trigg. The church is certainly called Wendron, from its
female patroness.

Bodilly I interpret the house by the church, from ilis, the same as
eglis, a church, from which it is not far distant. There are two
houses adjacent so called, Bodilly Veor and Bodilly Vear, the great
and the little. Bodilly Veor was the seat of Thomas Tresilian, Gent.
descended from the Tresilians of Roughtra, who, having mortgaged it to
Sir Peter Killigrew, sold the freehold to Mr. William Glynn, and
younger brother to Mr. Thomas Glynn, of Polkinhorne.

At Trenere there is an arched vault of moorstone adjoining to the
house, said to have been a cellar, and this place a hunting seat to
the ancient Dukes of Cornwall.


THE EDITOR.

It appears that the vicarage of Wendron, and perhaps the endowed
portion of the great tithes, belonged to Rewley Abbey, near Oxford,
founded by Edmund Earl of Cornwall, in compliance with an injunction
of his father Richard Earl of Cornwall; although Richard himself seems
to have commenced the foundation, for a manuscript history in the
Cotton Library says,

     “Frater enim hujus regis (Henrici tertii) Ricardus primus Comes
     Cornubiæ, post Rex Alemaniæ et Semper Augustus, fundavit Abbatias
     monachorum Cisterciensis ordinis de Royal alias Rewley Oxoniæ, et
     de Hayles in Comitatu Gloucestriæ, ubi honorifice est sepultus.
     Cor tamen suum Oxoniæ in choro fratrum minorum, sub sumptuosa et
     mirandi operis pyramide humatum est.”

The Charter of his son Edmund begins,

     “Sciant præsentes et futuri, quod nos Edmundus, claræ memoriæ
     Domini Ricardi regis Alemannii filius, et Comes Cornubiæ, dedimus
     concessimus et hac præsenti carta nostra confirmavimus Deo, et
     ecclesiæ beatæ Mariæ de Regali Loco in North Oseney juxta Oxon,
     et abbati inibi commoranti et quindecim monachis capellanis
     ordinis Cisterciensis ibi professis, pro anima Ricardi quondam
     regis Alemanniæ patris nostri, divino celebrantibus, et eorum
     successoribus ibidem commorantibus Deo servientibus et in
     perpetuum servituris, omnes terras et tenementa quæ habuimus in
     North Oseneye prope Oxon et (inter alia) unam acram terræ,
     secundum Angliæ consuetudinem mensuratam, de dominico nostro in
     terra de Bel juxta Roslyn, cum advocatione ecclesiæ de Sancta
     Wendrova, et aliis pertinentiis suis in hundredo de Kerier in
     Cornubia.”

And in the schedule returned to King Henry VIII. after the dissolution
of property belonging to Rewley Abbey,

Com. Cornub.

Wendromo et Stadyon, firma Rector’ … £.22.

This advowson had passed through various hands till it was assigned by
Mr. Matthew Wills, of Helston, on whose decease, in 1782, it came to
his son, Mr. Thomas Wills. This gentleman, although not intended for
the church, had received his education at Winchester and Oxford, and
the living happening to become vacant just at the period of his
father’s death, Mr. Wills was induced to take holy orders, and he is
now (1834) the Incumbent; but the advowson has been transferred to
Queen’s College, Oxford, for its Michell or new foundation; thus
returning almost to the very spot where it was bestowed almost six
hundred years before.

The barton of Trenethick is traced back to the family of Seneschalls,
from whom it came by a marriage to the Hills; the last of whom, Mr.
John Hill, gave it by will, about seventy years since, to a family
long seated in Constantine, of the same name, but, from their bearing
different arms, probably not related.

Nansloe, the vale leading to the lake, is beautifully situated in a
valley near the Loo. It has been for some time the seat of the
Robinsons, since they removed there from Bochim in Cury. The last
representative of this family in the male line was the late Reverend
William Robinson, Vicar of Crowan.

Trelil belonged to Mr. Rowe, steward to Lord Godolphin. His only
daughter and eventual heiress married Mr. William Harris, of
Rosewarne, in Camburne, Sheriff of Cornwall in the year 1773; and
their only daughter, married to Winchcombe Hartley, Esq. of Berkshire,
is its present possessor.

This parish has for ages been one of the most productive of tin in the
whole county; and before the improved operations of smelting had
placed all ores nearly on the same level as to the quality of their
products, the neighbourhood of Porkellis boasted of producing the best
tin in Cornwall.

The church is situated nearly at one extremity of this immense parish,
and has nothing to distinguish it but a monument to the memory of
Warin Penhallinyk, a prebendary of the monastery at Penryn, Rector of
St. Just, in Roseland, Vicar of Wendron and of the adjoining parish,
Stithyans. The Vicarage-house is a mere hovel. The parish feast is on
the nearest Sunday to October the 28th, St. Simon and St. Jude.

Mr. Jago, Vicar of Wendron, was perhaps the last clergyman in the west
of Cornwall supposed to exercise supernatural powers; various
anecdotes were current about him sixty years ago, and then generally
believed; all I apprehend to his credit, being such as laying spirits,
discovering thieves, &c. mixed up, however, with frivolities, as seems
ever to have happened in those popular legends. Whenever parson Jago
got off from his horse he struck the ground with his whip, and a demon
immediately appeared to hold or take care of his horse till he wanted
it again. The Rev. Francis Vyvyan Jago Arundell is descended either
from this gentleman or from his father.

  This parish measures (including Helston) 12,317 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815, Helston
    included                                8870     0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831,
            The Parish £1766  8  0 }        2656     5    0
            Helston      889 17  0 }

  Population, {  in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
    Wendron   {    3006   |   3555   |   4193   |   4780
    Helston   {    2248   |   2297   |   2671   |   3293
              { ----------|----------|----------|---------
              {    5254   |   5852   |   6869   |   8073
  giving an increase on the Parish of 59, on the Town 46½, on both
    together 53½,――per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

About two-thirds of this extensive parish is situated on granite,
which is the same as that of Camborne, Crowan, and Sithney adjoining;
the other third, which forms the southern part of the parish, is
composed of slate rocks, which near the granite are felspathic, and
clearly referrible to the porphyritic series; but as the sea is
approached, the character of these slates becomes obscure, such as
they generally are whenever the porphyritic and calcareous series pass
into each other.




GWINEAR.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the north
Gwythian, west Phelack, south Crowan and St. Erth, east Camburne.

In the Domesday Tax this district passed under the jurisdiction either
of Caerton in Crowan, Lewellen in Gwythian, or Hella in Camburne. In
the Inquisstion of the Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln into the
value of Cornish Benefices, 20th Edward I. 1294, Ecclesia de Sancto
Winer in decanatu de Penwid, was valued cxiii_s._ iiii_d._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition, 1521, it is valued 12_l._ by the same name of Winer. The
patronage in the Bishop of Exeter, who endowed it. The Incumbent
Thomas Paynter. The Rectory, or garbe sheaf, in possession of Howell,
under lease from Exeter College, Oxford. And the parish rated to the
4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 147_l._ 7_s._ 2_d._ by the name of
Gwiniar.

Lanyon, in this parish, a seat of the Lanyons, the first propagators
of this family in Cornwall, came, with many other French gentlemen,
into England, with Isabella, wife of King Edward II. and settled
themselves in those parts; amongst which Lanyon’s posterity have ever
since flourished in gentle degree in Cornwall; and for further proof
of this matter, that originally they came from the town of Lanyon,
situate upon a sea-haven, or harbour, in France, they give still the
arms of that town for their paternal coat armour, viz. in a field
Sable, a castle Argent, standing on waves of the sea Azure, over the
same a falcon hovering with bells. The present possessor, Tobias
Lanyon, Gent. that married Pineck; his father Reynolds.

Polkinhorne, in this parish (eminent or notable iron head). From this
place was denominated an old family of gentlemen surnamed Polkinhorne,
who gave for their arms, Argent, three bars Sable; whose only daughter
and heir, temp. Charles II. was married to Thomas Glynn, Gent. a
younger branch of the Glynns of Glynn, whose father giveth for his
arms, Argent, a chevron between three salmon-spears handled and barbed
Sable, two in chief, and one in the base part, with points downwards.

Coswin, in this parish (i. e. the white wood or fair) gave name and
original to an old family of gentlemen surnamed De Coswyn, who lived
reputably in this place for several descents, till John Coswyn, temp.
Charles II. by ill husbandry, wasted his paternal estate, and sold
this little barton to the person now in possession thereof.


TONKIN.

The right name of this parish is St. Wynnier, a corruption of St.
Wymer, its tutelar saint, by which name it is called in the Taxatio
Beneficiorum, Ecclesia Sancti Wymeri.

The great tithes of this parish are believed to have been bestowed on
Exeter College, by its founder, Walter de Stapledon, Bishop of Exeter,
A.D. 1318.

A younger brother’s daughter of Coswin, who squandered the property,
married Peter Pendarves, gent. and brought Bodrigge in Thellark into
that family.


THE EDITOR.

The parish of Gwiner has been extremely productive in copper. Herland
Mine, usually called the manor, produced so large a return to Mr.
Hobbin, only part proprietor of the land, as paid for the building of
Nansewidden in St. Columb, about the middle of the last century. It
has been since wrought on a most extensive scale, and to a great
depth.

Whele Alfred, Whele Trelistion, and others, have been very productive;
but at present they are all discontinued.

The family of most consequence connected with this parish is that of
Lanyon.

The first syllable certainly implies an inclosed place, from which it
has become specifically applied to a church, to a castle, and even to
a town. Mr. Hals’ conjectures as to the termination of the name,
appear to be so utterly groundless that they are omitted.

Mr. Whitaker believes that Lanyon in Normandy bears only a castle for
its cognisance, and that the falcon has been added on account of the
similarity in sound of Lanyer to Lanner, the favourite bird in
falconry.

It must be observed however that Lanyon is always in Cornwall
pronounced La-nine.

The Gwinear and Madern branches of the Laryon family were together
possessed of extensive property in the adjacent parishes; combinations
of unfortunate circumstances have diminished their possessions, but
hopes may be entertained that the Lanyons of Gwinear, who have never
lost the sense of what is due to the memory of their ancestors, may
again resume the former station of their family.

The Rev. Malachy Hitchins, Vicar of St. Hilary, held this living for
almost thirty years.

  Gwinear measures 3,882 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5185    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           800   18    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {  1651   |   1952   |   2383   |   2728
    giving an increase of 65 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. John Thomas Wilgress, collated, by the
    Bishop of Exeter in 1813.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish, like those adjoining, Camborne and Crowan, has been long
celebrated for its mines, but it does not resemble them by reposing in
part on granite, being confined entirely to rocks of the slate series.

The porphyritic courses are not so common here as in Gwennap; but they
often assume a very interesting form, occurring as insulated masses,
which in some cases are perfectly granitic, and at the same time
afford every indication of their having been formed contemporaneously
with the slate. The most curious geological phenomenon of this parish
is to be met with in Relistion Mine, where one of the lodes,
(metalliferous veins) at a considerable depth, is composed of rounded
pedules, cemented together in a hard solid mass; at first sight it
would be pronounced to be a decided conglomerate of derivative origin;
but on a more close examination it is found to have the spheroidal
structure, which is common to many rocks, and which in regard to this
mineral was probably coeval with its original formation.




GWITHIAN.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the north the
Irish Sea, or St. George’s Channel, and that creek or cove called
Gwithian Bay, east Illigan, west Phelack, south Gwyniar.

The entry occurs, Rex tenet Canardi-tone, in the Domesday tax 20
William I. 1087.

For in this parish is the voke lands of the great and privileged manor
of Coner, or Conner-ton, which claims by prescription not only the
royalties and jurisdiction within its limits, but also over the whole
hundred of Penwith (id est, the head tree). Hence it is that this
manor of Connerton is privileged not only with the jurisdiction of a
Court Leet or Baron for the whole hundred of Penwith, within which two
courts are tried all matters of debt and damage between party and
party within the same, (life, land, and limb excepted,) wherein
heretofore infinite number of causes have been depending, by reason of
its being the most remote part of the kingdom from the Courts of
Westminster; the steward or judge of which courts, (which offices
commonly are vested in one person,) takes his deputation from the now
lord of the manor, viz. Sir John Arundell, of Lanherne, Knight, and
not from the King or Duke of Cornwall’s stewards, as other bailiwicks
do.

For in the time of King Henry III. this manor was the King of
England’s or Earl of Cornwall’s lands, who, by letters patent, yet to
be seen at Lanherne, passed it over, together with the bailiwick of
the said hundred, to Simon Pincerna, or Butler, lord of Lanherne, in
consideration that he the said Simon had enfeoffed the said King
Henry, his heirs and successors, with the lordship and manor of St.
James at Westminster, in the county of Middlesex. After which exchange
or settlement, Pincerna and his heirs enjoyed this manor for several
descents, till Edward III.’s days. At which time one of the two
daughters and heirs of Pincerna was married to Arundell of Trenibleth,
the direct ancestor of Sir John Arundell of Lanherne, Knight, now in
possession of both those lordships. The other daughter to Umphravill.

To remove an action at law depending in those Courts, the writ must be
thus directed: “Senescallo et Ballivo hundredi et libertatis suæ de
Penwith in Comitatu Cornubiæ salutem.”

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the
value of Cornish benefices, 1294, “Ecclesia de Sancto Gwyth-ran, in
decanatu de Penwidh,” is valued cxiii_s._ iiii_d._ It seems at the
time of this inquisition this church was not consolidated into
Phillack; but before Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it past in
consolidation and value together with it, at 45_l._ 10_s._ 8_d._ The
patronage was formerly in the King of England, who endowed it; now
Arundell of Lanherne. And the parish is rated to the 4_s._ per pound
Land Tax, 1696, 58_l._ 2_s._ by the name Gwith-ran.


TONKIN.

This church is a rectory, daughter to Phillack, together with which it
is rated in the King’s Books, and passeth in the presentation. The
patronage is in Arundell of Lanherne, the incumbent Mr. Jasper
Phillips. This gentleman is since deceased, and has left the next
presentation, held by lease under the Arundells, to his nephew Mr.
Gregory, who has presented his brother-in-law, Mr. Edward Collins, son
of Mr. Collins, of Treworgy in St. Erm (great-grandfather to the
Editor).

This parish takes its name, like many others, from the Saint to whom
the church is dedicated, called by Mr. Carew, St. Gothian.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals’s derivation is again so utterly improbable as to be omitted.

The Arundells, being Catholics, leased the advowson of Phillack and
Gwithian on lives, to prevent its lapsing to the University of Oxford,
under an Act of Parliament. On the death of Mr. Edward Collins it did
so lapse, and the University presented Mr. William Glover, of
Worcestershire, first of Balliol College and then a chaplain of All
Souls. A lease was then granted to Mr. Hoskin, of Gwithian, and his
son the Rev. Richard Hoskin succeeded Mr. Glover, who on the general
sale of all the Arundell property in Cornwall, purchased the freehold,
so that his son is now patron and incumbent of the united parishes.

Mr. Lysons says that the advowson of these united parishes belonged to
the Priory of St. James in Bristol, and I find a charter of King Henry
II.

     “Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliæ, et Dux Normanniæ et
     Aquitaniæ, et Comes Andegaviæ, Archiepiscopis, &c. salutem.
     Sciatis me concessisse et præsenti carta mea confirmasse
     ecclesiæ sancti Jacobi de Bristow omnia subscripta, quæ
     Willielmus comes Gloecestriæ ei rationabiliter concessit et
     dedit in perpetuam elemosinam, scilicet inter alia et omnes
     ecclesias quæ sunt de feodo jam dicti comitis in Cornubia
     cum capellis et cum omnibus pertinentiis suis; scilicet
     Ecclesiam de Eglosrek, Ecclesiam de CONORTON, Ecclesiam de
     Eglasheil, Ecclesiam de Eglossant, Ecclesiam de
     Egloscraweyn, et Capellam de Bennartona, Ecclesiam de
     Melioton, et Ecclesiam Sancti Germoch.”

It is understood that the manor of Conorton had in some way been
connected with the honour of Gloucester before the Conquest. William
certainly gave it with that honour to Alan Earl of Britanny. Rufus had
it again to bestow, and under his grant it descended to the Earls of
Gloucester, originating in an illegitimate son of King Henry I.
William, the second of these earls, endowed the Priory of St. James.

Mr. Lysons says that Robert Earl of Gloucester, son of this Robert,
gave Conorton to Richard Pincerna in 1154, but he is clearly mistaken,
for the date proves it to be done by the same William. Pincerna is a
word used by writers mediæ et infimæ Latinitatis for butler. Qui vinum
convivis miscet, a Græco πινειν κιρνα. Ducange.

  Mihi sapit dulcius vinum in taberna,
  Quam quod aqua miscuit Præsulis Pincerna.
                                  WALTER DE MAPES.

The son of this Pincerna took the name of Conorton, as was usual in
those times, and settled at Lanherne; from this family it passed with
Lanherne to the Arundells, by marriage, in whom it continued till the
general wreck above referred to, when being reduced to a mere royalty
it was bought by the late Sir Christopher Hawkins, and since his
decease in 1829 the royalty has been purchased by an attorney, for the
purpose in all probability of holding the courts.

There is a tradition, supported by the authority of Leland, that a
town so large as to contain two churches stood on this manor, which
has been destroyed by sand; but the tale must at the least be a very
great exaggeration.

The account given by Mr. Hals of the exchange of the manor of Conorton
for St. James’ in Westminster, can scarcely be made to quadrate with
the above account, which appears to be authentic, and it is still
further opposed by the history of St. James’s Hospital, as given by
Tanner and Dugdale, they say:

“At a distance from the city, in the fields near Westminster, some
well disposed citizens of London, beyond the memory of man, and (as
some think) long before the Conquest, founded a hospital for the
reception of fourteen leprous women, to whom were afterwards added
brethren, to minister divine service.” This house was dedicated to St.
James, and rebuilt in the time of King Henry III.

It was under the government of a master (although the Abbat of
Westminster claimed a jurisdiction over it) till King Henry VI.
granted the perpetual custody of it to Eton College, who surrendered
it to King Henry VIII. anno Regni 23, (A. D. 1531) when it was valued
at 100_l._ per annum, in exchange for Chattisham in Suffolk. On or
near the place where this hospital stood has been since built the
present Royal Palace of St James.

Mr. Lysons has been so fortunate as to obtain from the late rector
some information respecting the inundation of sand, which has
devastated a large portion of these two parishes, extending its
ravages wherever the coast is low, throughout the whole northern space
of Cornwall, from the Land’s End to Devonshire. There has always
existed a traditional account of this inundation, corroborated by the
ecclesiastical valuations, which are far too high for the actual
extent of land, and also said to be confirmed by documents preserved
in the Arundell family, carrying back the commencement of the evil
nearly to the period of their acquiring the property.

With respect to more recent inundations, Mr. Hoskin in stated to Mr.
Lysons, that the barton of Upton, one of the principal farms, was
suddenly overwhelmed; that his great-grandfather remembered the
occupier residing in the farmhouse, which was nearly buried in one
night, the family being obliged to make their escape through the
chamber windows; and that in consequence of the wind producing a
shifting of the sand, in the winter of 1808-9, the house, after having
disappeared for more than a century, came again to view.

The rector further stated that he himself remembered two fields lost
at Gwithian, and that they are now covered with sand to the depth of
ten or twelve feet, and that the church-town would have been also
lost, if the parish officers had not promptly resorted to an
expedient, which, simple as it may seem, has every where proved to be
the most efficacious in arresting this gigantic evil, that of planting
rushes; these stop completely the progress of sand, and greatly
facilitate the growth of other vegetation on the surface, so as to
create a thin turf. The hillocks of sand exhibit a model in miniature
of the Alps.

This sand is entirely calcareous, being a mass of comminuted shells,
and immense quantities are carried away for manure, more especially in
the cultivation of strong clay lands; but no method sufficiently cheap
for practice has yet been invented for burning this shell sand into
lime, as the fine powder chokes the fuel in any kiln, and a
reverberatory furnace is much too expensive.

On the opposite coast of Cornwall the sand is siliceous.

Godrery belongs to Lord De Dunstanville, a bold promontory
distinguished by an island beyond it, and by a dangerous reef
extending far into St. Ive’s Bay.

Other lands are much divided. Mr. Hoskin the present rector, and his
relations, are considerable proprietors, and several resident farmers
live on their own freeholds, Mr. Veal, Mr. Phillips, and others.

Notice has been taken of a very large fig tree growing in the
churchyard; the wonder is much diminished by knowing that this tree
was planted by the late rector; but as chalk is of all soils the most
favourable to figs, it is not improbable that calcareous sand may
participate in the same quality.

The parish feast is held on the nearest Sunday to the first of
November, All Saints Day.

  This parish measures 2,249 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         1,110     0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           92     2    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    329  |     372  |     412  |     539
    giving an increase of about 64 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are well exhibited at Godrery Point, they
consist of a fine blue and fissile slate, and of a thick lamellar and
somewhat compact rock. They are not metalliferous, and resemble those
of Trevaunance in St. Agnes. The greater part of the parish is covered
with hillocks of calcareous sand, as is common on many parts of the
north coast.




HELLAND.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Trigge, and hath upon the north St.
Mabyn, East Blissland, and part of Bodmin parish; south, Bodmin Town;
west, part of St. Mabyn and Egleshayle. The name refers to the church,
and signifies the hall college, temple, or church.

That there was an endowed rectory church here before the Norman
Conquest I make no doubt, since in the Domesday Roll it is taxed by
the name of Henland, and also in the Inquisition of the Bishops of
Lincoln and Winchester into the value of Church Benefices in Cornwall,
1294, “Ecclesia de Hellan in decanatu de Trigminorshire,” is valued
xl_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, 9_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._ The patronage
formerly in the Prior of Bodmin, who endowed it; after in Heale and
Bulteel; now in Robins, or Tress, or Trelawny; and the parish rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land-Tax, 1696, by the name of Helland, 84_l._
17_s._ 4_d._ The incumbent White.

At Bo-cuny-an, in this parish, is the dwelling of my very kind friend
Dr. Robert Heart, who married Molesworth and Hawkey; originally
descended from the Hearts of Tencreek, of Mynhyniet, or St. German’s,
and giveth for his arms, Gules, on a chief Argent three human hearts
Proper.

Note further, that whosoever is possessed in fee of the barton of
Helland, (for Bara-ton, i. e. the Bread Town lands in this parish,) is
legal patron of the same, paying only 40_s._ to the Rector Incumbent
for the time being, in full satisfaction for all the great and small
tithes of the said barton, according to an ancient pact or composition
made between the first Rector thereof and the Prior of Bodmin, who
endowed it. Which sum of 40_s._ per annum at the time of the
Inquisition aforesaid, was the value of the tithes of the whole
parish.

Note further, wherever the word barton occurs in this history, it
being Cornish British, it must be interpreted either as the barred,
bolted, or fenced towne, or as a contraction of the word Bara-ton
aforesaid, for as bara is bread in British, so ton or tone is a town
or village, a manor, parish, tenement, or part thereof; the place
where commonly the lord of the land had a well bolted or barred house
to dwell in; or else a town or house which was notable for keeping or
dispensing freely of bread for support of man’s life.


TONKIN.

The words Hel or Hale are at least the Cornish pronunciation of the
English hall, atrium, and this word was applied to churches as well as
to gentlemen’s houses in various parts of England, as Helldon Rectory
in Norfolk Halling, Kent, &c., and see the 140th stanza of Mount
Calvary.

  Pylat eth yn mes ay hell yn un lowarth an gevo
  Pylat went out of y^e hall into a garden w^{ch} he found,

But after all, if we may believe the parishioners, the name is a
contraction for Helen’s Land, the church being dedicated to St.
Helena, the mother of Constantine.

In this parish lived the old family of the Giffords, who married one
of the inheritrixes of the Esses, or Vanstorts, in the time of Henry
VI. as Gifford’s heiress was married to Nicholls of Penrose.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Whitaker has observed, in a note on what Mr. Hals says on the word
barton, a term now almost indiscriminately applied to all large farms,
although in former times it was probably restricted to what Mr. Hals
denominates the yoke land of a manor.

Barton in English is Bere-ton, as Berwick, and signifies primarily a
farm-house distinguished by the corn generally raised, once bere, or
barley; and from the house the term has been transferred to the estate
annexed. Baraton here means the same as bara, bread or corn, bara pill
the corn harbour, bara-Llan, barton (Cornish) a cornfield, and barn
(as in English) a corn-house.

Mr. Lysons mentions several manors in this parish, but they do not
appear ever to have possessed any importance or curiosity, except that
the manor of Penhargard belonged to the unfortunate Chief Justice
Trevilian, and that the barton of Brades or Broads was for some time
the seat of a younger branch of the Glynns.

Robert Glynn, Esq. residing there, married in 1711 Lucy Clobery, and
their only son was Doctor Glynn, a Fellow of King’s College,
Cambridge, well known and distinguished for his abilities, learning,
and philanthropy, and in some degree also for occasional
eccentricities. He obtained not merely one of the University prizes,
but great reputation by a Latin Poem on the Day of Judgment, in the
year 1757; and in illustration of other parts of his character, having
attended as a physician on the family of some agricultural labourer
near Cambridge, and restored them to health, the man’s wife lamented
their poverty, but begged of the Doctor to take a tame bird in their
possession, as the only thing in their power to bestow. Doctor Glynn
accepted the present, but declared that he could not keep his bird in
a college room, and that therefore they must keep it for him, at an
allowance of half a crown a week.

To be invited by Doctor Glynn to drink tea at his room was always
considered as an honour by the younger members of the University, and
the Editor remembers to have heard that Mr. Pitt, then at the head of
the government, and just elected into a seat more flattering than any
office the crown could confer, expressed himself pleased by the
repetition of these invitations from Doctor Glynn.

  Helland measures 2,053 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          1,588    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           102    0    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   221   |    223   |    264   |    285
    giving an increase of 29 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Francis J. Hext, presented in 1817, by
    William Morshead, Esq.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geology of this parish is similar to that of the western part of
Bodmin. It is however worthy of remark that in the road from Bodmin to
Camelford several beds of granitic elvan are exposed to view. The
first at the top of the hill near Smith’s, resembles a coarse granitic
sandstone, and at its junction with the slate both rocks are perfectly
distinct, not having any appearance of transition, which circumstance
is in favour of its being a derivative rock. This subject, however,
requires further examination. The other elvans are more compact and
porphyritic, and contain hornblende, resembling those of Carraton
Hill, near Liskeard, situated within the granite.




HELSTON.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon the east Gwendron,
west Sythney and the Loopoole, south Maugan and Gunwallo.

That this was a privileged place, and the voke lands of a manor, with
court leet, before the Norman Conquest, I make no doubt, since the
whole hundred of Kerryer, in King Alfred’s days, was in chief
denominated from it. Besides this testimony, in Domesday Roll 20
William I. 1087, we read that by the name of Henliston, it was then
taxed. Moreover, Brooke, York Herald, tells us temp. James I. in the
Catalogue of Cornish Earls, that the privileges of this town or manor
were concerted into a charter, and incorporated by Richard
Plantagenet, Earl of Cornwall, 3d son of King Henry II. surnamed
Cur-lyon, from his lion-like heart, in the name of Helleston, as
appeared from the charter, which he had then in his custody, to the
seal whereof was affixed a lion rampant. It was also made one of the
four coinage towns by King Edward I. in his charter to the Tinners, by
the same name (See the charter under Luxilian). As also incorporated
into the Duchy of Cornwall, by the same name 1336, when King Edward
III. to his son the Black Prince promoted or translated the Earldom of
Cornwall into a Duchy or Dukedom.

Whereby this town is also confirmed to be the voke lands of the manors
or stanneries of Helston and Kerryer, (id est, Hall, Broad Town, and
Lover,) and privileged with a Court Leet, wherein all pleas of debt
and damage, between party and party, concerning tin matters, are tried
by a jury of six men, before the Vice Warden and Steward of the
Stanneries, (under the Lord Warden thereof,) life, land, and limb
excepted. It is also privileged with a Court Leet before the tribunal
of the Mayor and Aldermen, and Quarterly Sessions of the Peace, and
sending two members to Parliament; markets weekly on Saturday; fairs
on August 29, October 28, Saturday before Midlent Sunday, Saturday
before Palm Sunday, Whitsun Monday, and two fairs before St. Thomas à
Becket’s day. Moreover, these privileges were confirmed and enlarged
by charters temp. Queen Elizabeth and King Charles I. by the name of
the Mayor and Burgesses, who consist of a Mayor (who is a Justice of
the Peace for the Borough, the year succeeding his Mayoralty), and
four Aldermen, who elect as many Common Councilmen as make their
number twelve. Their Members of Parliament are elected by the majority
of the freemen, and returned by the Mayor, to whom the precept on the
writ for election must be thus directed, as well as that for removing
an action depending in the Leet of Helston to a superior Court:

     “Majori et Burgensibus Burgi nostri de Helleston in Comitatu
     Cornubiæ, salutem.”

Not far from this town stands the ruins of an old camp, or
intrenchment, called Castle Werre, or Wera, an old fort or citadel to
defend it from its enemies’ invasion. The arms of which town are
Argent, a castle, or house, garreted on the top thereof, between two
watch-towers, the Archangel St. Michael fighting with a dragon, or the
devil.

That King Edward I. frequented this place for delight or pleasure, or
designed so to do, upon the death of his uncle Richard Earl of
Cornwall, King of the Romans, when the Earldom of Cornwall reverted to
himself, in right of his Crown of England, Anno Dom. 1272, is evident
from his granting lands by the tenure of grand sergeantry to William
de Treville, on condition of bringing a fishhook and a boat and net,
at his own proper costs and charges, for the king’s fishing in the
lake of Helston, whensoever the King should come to Helston, and as
long as he should tarry there. See the copy of this enfeofment deed in
Sythney parish.

The chief inhabitants of this coinage town for tin are Mr. Penrose,
Mr. Polkinhorne, Mr. Hooker, attorney at law, Mr. Williams, Mr. Rawe,
Mr. Burges, Mr. Pinock, and others.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the
value of Cornish Benefices, 1294, the church of Helston is not named,
but passed then under the title of its mother or superior church,
Gwendron, into which it was consolidated, 17_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._; in
Wolsey’s Inquisition, by the names of Wendron and Helston, 26_l._
19_s._ 3_d._; both endowed, I suppose, by the Master or Governor of
St. John’s Hospital at Sythney, who were patrons thereof till the 6th
Henry VIII. when it was dissolved, now Jago; the incumbent Jago; and
the town or parish of Helston rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax,
1696, 181_l._ 9_s._ 4_d._

In the year 1727 happened in those parts astonishing claps of thunder
and lightning, which in fine broke down and tore in pieces the
greatest part of this town’s church and tower, and did it damage to
the value of two or three hundred pounds in repair thereof.


TONKIN.

This church is a Vicarage, endowed, and passeth in the presentation
with Gwendron.

Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, tells us that within this town
was an hospital, but gives no further account of it; so that it is
unknown to me whether it were a spital erected for the relief of
pilgrims from abroad, or for the use of sick impoverished people
within the town. Most assured I am that near this place there was a
priory erected to the name of St. John the Baptist.


THE EDITOR.

I have omitted some paragraphs from Hals and from Tonkin respecting
several derivations of the name “Helstone,” as all the circumstances
of the place seem to point at one so decidedly as to exclude all
consideration of the others. No doubt this one transgresses an
arbitrary rule confining the themes of all derivations to a single
language; but the instances in contradiction are so numerous
throughout all England, as to render this circumstance of no
importance.

The spot long used as a bowling-green is acknowledged on all hands to
have been the site of an ancient castle. It must therefore have been
the nucleus of the town; and the marsh extending from the Loo Pool
along the valley, passes under the scarped rampart of the castle.

Hellas is well known to signify a marsh in the Celtic dialect used in
Cornwall, and the termination Ton, the origin of our general word
town, signified, in the Saxon,――more especially a walled town, or
fortress; Helleston is therefore the fortress on the marsh.

The first charter of incorporation given to Helston, at least from the
supreme feudal chief, is said to have been by King John. It is,
however, highly probable that privileges of guild may have been
bestowed long before by the Princes of Cornwall, vassals from the time
of Athelstan. Various other charters were granted, till, in the early
part of the reign of George III. the number of corporators became so
reduced that the remainder were incapable of performing any corporate
act; a new charter was in consequence obtained, and at the next
general election the individuals named in it returned two members; but
six persons remaining of the former party did the same: and so strong
at that period was the feeling for chartered rights, in consequence of
the conduct pursued by King Charles II. and his successor, that a
committee of the House of Commons determined the right to remain in
this fragment, incapable of performing any other civil act. And songs
were made on the occasion, comparing these heroes with Eustace de St.
Pierre and his companions.

  When Edward set down before Calais,
    Replete with rage and with malice,
  Not the six famous burghers
    More courage displayed
  Than the six men of Helston.

One, if not two more returns were made in the same manner, till the
number being fallen down to two very old men, they were induced to
wave their privilege, partly, it is said, from an apprehension
entertained that the maxim of Roman law, tres faciunt collegiam, might
be effectually urged against them.

A custom had grown up at Helston, from early times, and by no means
peculiar to that place, in compliance with which the patron, a well
known and definite appellation, paid all the parochial rates; but an
opinion may be formed of their small amount at no distant period, from
the following statement. The Editor being on a Committee of the House
of Commons, to consider and report on the poor laws soon after the
conclusion of the late war, laid before the Committee a copy of a poor
rate made for a parish in the west of England in the year 1704: it
amounted to four pounds and some few shillings, while in the current
year it exceeded six hundred pounds.

This practise in Helston became the ground of a petition after the
general election of 1812; and, opinions having now changed, the matter
was taken up so seriously in the House of Commons, as to induce the
passing of a bill for disfranchising the borough. The other branch of
the legislature, however, considered the practice, although wrong in
itself, yet a delictum sine crimine, in this particular instance, as
it most clearly appeared that some leading gentlemen, possessed of
such influence as would have enabled them to make great lucrative
advantages for themselves other ways, were benefited in so slight a
degree by these payments, as to make it quite evident that
self-interest had not been the motive of their conduct. The bill did
not pass into a law, and the town became regularly assessed like other
places. The well-known connection usual in such cases had long
subsisted between this town and the neighbouring family of Godolphin.

At the period of the last heraldic visitation in 1640, the signatures
to the return of arms, &c. were,

  The mark × of John Roe Moyes.
  Thomas Seyntaubyn.
  William Robinson.
  Thomas James.
  John Herbert.
    Dated October 9, 1640.

And the members of the corporation are stated to be,

  BURGESSES.

  John Rowe Moyes.
  Thomas St. Aubyn, Gent.
  William Robinson.
  Alexander Bolytho.
  John Harbert.
  John Alexander.
  Thomas Godolphin, of Godolphin, Esq. Recorder.
  Thomas James.
  Robert Cock.
  William Penhaluwick.
  Daniel Bedford.
  William Trewin.
  Patrick Pesseme.
  John Cock.
  Thomas Randall, Steward of the said Town and Corporation.

In the Parliament preceding that, the Editor’s great-great-grandfather,
William Noye, afterwards Attorney-General, represented Helston; and he
himself had the same honour in the Parliament following the Union with
Ireland. On the total change of the parliamentary constitution in
1832, the limits of Helston were extended so as to include a large
portion of Wendron and the entire parish of Sithney. And the whole was
reduced to sending one Member, or, according to a familiar expression,
it was placed in Schedule B.

On that occasion a letter was addressed to a gentleman of the town, in
return for a present of some delicacies, so full of wit and humour
that the Editor, having been favoured with a copy, is induced to
insert it.

     “Your very obliging present made its appearance this day,
     together with your note of the 2d instant; pray, accept my best
     thanks for the same, the quality of which will, I have no doubt,
     on trial fully justify the favourable impression already made by
     their fragrance.

     “Under the melancholy circumstances of affliction in which your
     town must be plunged by the announcement of the intended
     spoliation of a moiety of its electoral privileges, it is most
     pleasing to recognise a disposition in the leading citizens to
     impart of their good things to others; and although I should at
     all times have been much delighted by any mark of your friendly
     remembrance, yet it is doubly gratifying at a period like the
     present, when public embarrassments might naturally be supposed
     to absorb every other feeling, and to leave little room for
     indulging a spirit of individual philanthropy.

     “Allow me, however, to express the hope, that as, when Hercules
     broke off the horn of the river god Achelous, it became the
     medium through which the golden gifts of the Genius of Plenty
     were showered down, so the ancient and patriotic borough of
     Helston, although shorn of a part of its long-enjoyed honours,
     and mutilated as to one of its protectors, may still flourish
     with a cornucopia of abundance and of prosperity.

         2671. (φυε, φυε, οττοτοι, παπαι, αι, αι) 2671.

     “quoth the Population Return for 1821.

     “For which slight numerical deficiency, and for no earthly
     offence imputable to the inhabitants, save that of a practical
     application of the principle ‘non numero, sed honore valemus,’
     the long-standing privileges of loyal men are scandalously
     invaded, and a body of independent electors declared incapable of
     exercising more than one half of their prescriptive rights.

     “I seem to hear an indignant voter of Helston exclaim, ‘Why this
     measure of penal severity, accompanied at the same time with an
     apparent mitigation and leniency?’ Political annihilation had been
     a milder doom; extermination from the lists of suspected
     corruption had been far better than thus to suffer mutilation
     from the pruning knife of reform, beneath the wound inflicted by
     which the gangrene of dissatisfaction will still lurk and fester
     for ever.

            ――――Mene Iliacis occumbere campis
            Non potuisse!

     “Happier were it to have sunk amidst the ruins of Sarum, or to
     have perished in the plains of Gatton,

            Sævus ubi Æacidæ telo jacet Hector, ubi ingens
            Sarpedon――――

     “than to be thus sent adrift, single-masted and disabled, on the
     doubtful sea of political adventure. They who now fall,

            Sumptis apud Ilion armis.

     “will meet no inglorious fate; under the banners of Peel, or the
     shield of Wetherall, it will be honourable to be conquered; and
     the page of history will supply a never-dying splendour for the
     illustrious patriots whose destinies were sealed by the
     Parliament of 1831. But to be denied this noble privilege, to
     remain a still-enduring monument of the wrongs inflicted, and of
     the mercies awarded! to be held up as an example of the wisdom of
     half-measures, and the policy of semi-destruction! to be denied
     the consolation of despair! and to be snatched from the gulph of
     ruin to an acuter sensation of helplessness!

            Σκληροκαρδιος αρ’ ειῃ
            Ὁτῳ ταδ’ ου μελησεἰ.

     “The remainder of this classic dirge, or ælinon, no less
     remarkable for the purity of its diction than for the fine flow
     of feeling and tone of patriotism by which it is characterised,
     is intended to form a part of a great national work, to be
     printed at the Clarendon press, and to be sent forth into the
     world,――Iliadum lachrymas inter[5] justasque querelas.

     “But I find that I must come to a hasty conclusion; trusting
     therefore that you will pardon my adventuring to meddle with any
     thing so sacred as a venerable borough in affliction, and begging
     you will present my unfeigned condolence to all parties
     interested to whom I have the honour of being known, I remain,
     &c.”

The old church is said by Mr. Hals to have been greatly injured by a
thunder-storm in 1727. It appears never to have been thoroughly
repaired; and in 1763, Lord Godolphin, the patron, built a large
church and a lofty tower, nearly on the site of the former. The church
is without pillars, and capable of containing a numerous congregation;
but the whole is strongly characteristic of the bad taste prevalent at
the period when it was erected.

Just over the bridge leading to the westward stood the hospital
dedicated to St. John, and founded by a member of the Killegrews. The
spot is still marked by a large upright stone near the bridge, bearing
the sword with its crosletted hilt, the cognizance of the military
order of St. John. Little, however, is known about it. Dugdale states
that at the dissolution in the 26th of Henry VIII. the total annual
revenue of the house amounted to 14_l._ 7_s._ 4_d._ and the actual
receipts to 12_l._ 16_s._ 4_d._

About the year 1805 the town received a very considerable improvement
by the removal of the Coinage Hall from the middle of the principal
street leading south-west from the middle of the town. The Editor at
that time represented Helston, and had the good fortune to assist
materially in promoting the negociation with the Duchy officers, in
consequence of his acquaintance with Mr. Sheridan, and with others
whose consent was necessary to be obtained. The Market-house is a
venerable monument of former times; yet, if this also could be
removed, the improvement would equal that effected by the former.

Helston, in great measure unconnected with trade or with a sea port,
little of a thoroughfare before the turnpike road was made, surrounded
by the residences of ancient, respectable, and wealthy families, and
inhabited by gentlemen of a similar description, has ever been
celebrated for the superior quality of its social manners, and at the
same time for an easy and familiar intercourse between all the people
in their various stations; the inferior experiencing the truth of what
all the histories of all nations have confirmed from the earliest
periods of Greece to the recent events of our own time,

  Αρχαιοπλουτων δεσποτων πολλη χαρις·
  Ὁι δ’ ουποτ’ ελπισαντες, ημησαν καλως,
  Ωμοι τε δουλοις, παντα και παρα σταθμην.

And the reverse of

  Απας δε τραχυς, ὁστις αν νεον κρατῃ.

These circumstances account for the continuance of old manners and of
old customs longer here than in other places.

All towns appear to have adopted, on one day at least in the year,
practices similar to the Roman Saturnalia; in most places, the lines
of society having become broad and strongly impressed, their
observances descended to the more vulgar, or rather perhaps to the
vicious; and changing their character from harmless amusements to
practices of outrage and violence, they have been discontinued or
suppressed: but in Helston an ancient observance of this kind,
refining with the refinement of the age, still continues in activity.

The origins of all these customs are obscured or totally lost in their
remote antiquity. That of Helston corresponded, however, precisely
with its name――“a foray,” locally corrupted into furray; the young
people rushed out of the town into the country early on the eighth of
May, when, entering all houses without leave or ceremony, they
appeared to seize whatever they wanted, and from the real nature of
the transactions, whatever they wanted was sure of being found; and
ultimately they returned to the town in triumph, dancing and decorated
with flowers, where the scenes of the morning were, in some degree,
repeated. All these practices, however, are less and less persevered
in from year to year, so that the whole is rapidly tending towards the
single entertainment of a ball; and if the ladies had succeeded in a
classical fancy, which, some how or other, got possession of their
minds, the very memory of this festival would have been lost.

Not intimately acquainted, one may presume, with the true history of
the patroness they had selected to sanction their gaieties, the
goddess Flora was made to preside over a foray, instituted, as some
assert, before the Norman conquest, and in commemoration of a victory
obtained over the Saxons, who had landed at a cove still called
Perthsasnac; but the utter absurdity of the substitution, and the
popularity given to the word FORAY by Sir Walter Scott’s Poems, have
restored the ancient and true appellation.

Causes similar to those which have retained the foray, have also kept
up the practice of bowling; so that in Helston alone can one now see
the principal gentlemen of the town assembled on the bowling-green,
enjoying at once exercise, fresh air, and agreeable intercourse, free
from any spirit of gambling and from the slightest indulgence of a
habit more common and less excusable.

The word faddy is used to express the dance, the air, or both, used in
celebrating the foray; the origin of this term is quite unknown.

The air is preserved by Edward Jones in his Musical and Poetical
Relics of the Welsh Bards. He has also printed some lines which were
sung by the dancers; they are, however, so entirely devoid of sense,
or even of antiquity, that I shall not transcribe them.

The air is supposed to be a remnant of British music; one very like
it, if not identically the same, has been found in Ireland, and
according to report in Scotland. It may therefore be justly esteemed a
curiosity.

  The measurement of Helston is included in Gwendron; and the value
    of Real Property is not distinguished in the returns to Parliament
    from the parish.
  The Poor Rates and Population have been given under Gwendron
   (Wendron), but they are here repeated.
  Poor Rate in 1831, £889. 17_s._
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   2248  |    2297  |    2671  |    3293
    giving an increase of 46½ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The northern part of this parish, approaching the granite of Wendron,
is composed of felspar and hornblende rocks; the southern so much
abounds in some parts with siliceous varieties of rock as to form
barren downs, which stretch from Love Bar to the vicinity of Gweek.


     [5] “An old scholiast upon this passage proposes to read
     meritas; but says little in defence of his suggestion,
     beyond adverting to divers suicidal acts of the ultra
     Tories, as he calls them, which are said to have been
     perpetrated by them on various occasions.”




ST. HILARY.


Mr. Hals begins his account of this parish with a long history of the
patron saint, including all the controversies or disputed points of
doctrine in which he was engaged; all this, extending through many
pages, is omitted.

St. Hilary was born at Poictiers, in France, about the end of the
third or the beginning of the fourth century.

He was descended from an illustrious family, and received an education
suited to his station in life, by which he was initiated into all the
secular learning of those times; but finding the Pagan mythology
utterly absurd, and the prevalent system of philosophy quite
unsatisfactory, he examined the Christian writings, and became a
convert. He seems never to have adopted the brutalizing austerities so
prevalent in those ages, but to have employed his talents, his
acquired eloquence, and his learning, against the Arians and in
defence of the Nicene creed. Several of his works are extant, and have
gone through many editions. The whole were printed by the Benedictine
Monks of Paris, “St. Hilarii Opera omnia per Monachos Benedictinos
edita; Gr. et Lat. Parisiis, 1693, Fol.” Erasmus published the works
of St. Hilary in 1544, and says in his Preface, “Quicquid ingenio,
quicquid eloquentia, quicquid sacrarum literarum cognitione posset;”
and his contemporary, St. Jerome, says of him, “Hilarius, meorum
Confessor temporum, et Episcopus, duodecim Quintiliani libros et
titulo imitatus est et numero;” referring to his twelve books on the
Trinity.

In the judgment of modern critics his style at least is not thought
worthy of all the praise bestowed on it by St. Jerome; for, although
it is stated to be lofty and noble, and moreover beautified with
rhetorical ornaments and figures, yet it is too much studied and
lengthened in many periods, so as to be obscure and even
unintelligible.

The following passage on singleness of heart, has been cited by
various authors.

“Christ teaches that only those who become again, as it were, little
children, and by the simplicity of that age cut off the inordinate
affections of vice, can enter into the kingdom of heaven. Those follow
and obey their father, love their mother, are strangers to
covetousness, ill-will, hatred, arrogance, lying, and are inclined
easily to believe what they hear. This disposition of affection opens
the way to heaven. We must therefore return to the simplicity of
little children, in which we shall bear some resemblance to our Lord’s
humility.” From his commentary on the Gospel of St. Matthew.

St. Hilary, previous to his conversion, had married, and his family
consisted of one daughter; he immediately separated himself from them;
his wife retired into a religious society. And after the saint had
been consecrated Bishop of Poictiers in the year 355, he learned with
the utmost horror and affright that his daughter was about to take on
herself the unholy bonds of matrimony. His prompt and impassioned
remonstrances conveyed in a letter which is printed among his works,
conjuring her by the God of heaven not to act so unworthy a part, were
successful; the marriage was broken off, and he had the gratification
of seeing his daughter, a spouse of Christ, expire not long after at
his feet.

St. Hilary composed a treatise which might in ordinary times have
conciliated him to every sect then in existence. He there maintained
that errors on speculative points of abstruse doctrine, were more
sinful in the sight of God than any conduct the most atrocious; but
controversy ran so high, and St. Hilary had taken a part so violent
against the Arians, that even this merit could not save him from
banishment, when that equally poised division of the church obtained
some temporary preponderance in a synod, or succeeded in acquiring to
their party the temporal chief; who, without using the form of words,
practically evinced that he was “over all persons and over all causes,
ecclesiastical as well as civil, within those his dominions supreme.”

The saint, however, died at Poictiers in the year 368. St. Augustine
relates many miracles wrought at his tomb; but the relics are said to
have been removed to the Abbey of St. Denis, near Paris; and his
festival is kept on the 14th of January, although it is not certain
either that he died, or that his relics were translated on that
particular day.


HALS.

Hilary is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the north
St. Earth, west Gulval, [Ludgvan EDITOR,] east Germow, south and west
the Mounts Bay and Peranuthno. As for the name Hilary, it is derived
from the tutelar guardian and patron of this church, viz. St. Hilary,
Bishop of Poictiers in Gaul, the maul and hammer against the Arians,
whose fame is eternized in the Roman agonals and festivals, though his
memory and day is not celebrated as a martyr, but as one of the
principal confessors of the Roman church; that is to say, one of those
that suffered great persecution for the name and Gospel of Christ
Jesus.

In Domesday book this district, or parish, was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Lanmigall, i. e. Michael’s church or temple; now St.
Michael’s Mount and Tremarastell, i. e. the market hole or cell, of
which more under.

In the Taxation, or value, of Cornish Benefices aforesaid, made by the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia de Sancti Hilary in
decanatu de Penwith, appropriata Priori Sancti Micaelis, is rated to
first fruits lxxiii_s._ iiii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition and Valor
Beneficiorum, St. Hilary Vicarage is valued 11_l._ 6_s._ 0_d._ The
patronage formerly in the Abbat or Prior of St. Michael’s Mount, who
endowed it. After its dissolution, 26th Henry VIII. it fell to the
crown, and was sold to Militon, whose six daughters and heirs invested
their husbands and purchasers therewith; the patronage now alternately
in Erisey, Godolphin, Buller, and others (or Roberts); the garb, or
rectory, in possession of Pennock. The parish of St. Hilary was rated
to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, of 1696, at 120_l._

Tregumbo, also Tregimbo, is the dwelling of Captain John Pinneck,
Deputy-Governor of the Island of Scilly, under Sir William Godolphin,
Knight, salary about 13_l._ per annum; who married Davies.

Treveneage, in this parish, was formerly the lands of Sir Thomas
Arundell, of Tolverne, Knight, who sold this barton and manor to Sir
Nicholas Hals, of Fentongallan, knight, whose son and heir, John Hals,
sold it to Walker of Exeter; from whose heirs it came by purchase to
Sir Joseph Tredinham, Knight, now in possession thereof.

On the confines of this parish is situate the ancient manor and
borough of Marazion.(_a_)

In Domesday Roll, 20th William I. 1087, this place was taxed by the
name of Tremarastoll; that is to say, the cell, chapel, or hole
market-town; situate in a remote corner, vallum, or pit, upon the
seashore of St. Michael’s Mount. At which time, no doubt, the Abbat or
Prior of St. Michael’s Mount (as they were afterwards till 26th Henry
VIII. when that Abbey was dissolved), were lords and high lords
thereof; when it was privileged with the jurisdiction of a court leet;
as afterwards, temp. Henry II. with sending two of its members to sit
in the Commons’ House of Parliament. But, as appears from the
Parliament Rolls in the Tower of London, after the dissolution of the
Abbey or Priory aforesaid, this town neglected to send its Members,
“for that it could not conveniently pay its burgesses their daily
wages, propter paupertatem,” which are the words of the record.(_b_)
It is also privileged with a fair, or mart, on July 11th, November
30th, Good Friday, and Palm Monday; and a market weekly on Saturdays.

And as a further mark of its ancient grandeur, I take it still to be
an incorporate mayor or portreeve town; but more sure I am, that, as
some other petty corporations’ names in Cornwall are adjectives merged
or fallen in or upon the parishes wherein they are situate, as
Camelford, Mitchell, &c. this town is a noun substantive, and stands
charged by itself in the Exchequer to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax,
1696, by the name of the borough of Maraszeyan, 76_l._ 12_s._ 6_d._

In the beginning of the reign of King Henry VIII. (1514) when war had
been proclaimed against the French King, a fleet of French men of war,
consisting of thirty sail, with some marine regiments of soldiers
therein, coasting in our British Channel, at length came into this
Mount’s Bay, and there dropped anchor; when soon after they landed a
considerable number, or quantity, of seamen and soldiers, and marched
in hostile manner towards this town. Which the inhabitants observing,
they forsook their houses, and fled to the hill country; whereby the
Frenchmen became peaceably possessed thereof, and plundered the same
for some days, till they understood that John Carminow, of
Fentongollan, Esq. was coming or marching towards them, with his posse
comitatus, to give them battle; when instantly they set the town on
fire, and the houses on the contiguous part of the country, and burnt
the same totally to the ground, to the great loss and damage of the
inhabitants, and forthwith fled to their ships for safety and
protection; and thereupon their ships hoisted anchors and put forth to
sea again. Where they had not long been till Sir Anthony Oughthred,
King Henry VIII.’s Admiral at sea, with a squadron of thirty men of
war, met and gave them battle, to their great loss of men and some
ships of war, whilst the rest of their fleet ran away, and fled into
the haven of Brest for safety and protection.


THE HISTORY OF ST. MICHAEL’S MOUNT.――PART I.

So called, for that our ancestors, the Britons, apprehended the
appearance of the Archangel St. Michael, about the year of our Lord
495, was in this place, though the Italians say it was upon Mount
Garganus, in their country, and the Frenchmen tell us that it was upon
their Mount St. Michael, in Normandy; such difference amongst writers
is about it; and verily this matter of fact is worth contending for,
since the etymology of Michael is “sicut Deus,” i. e. as God, as I
have shewn elsewhere under other churches to him dedicated. It appears
from the history of the church of Landaff, as Mr. Camden hath
observed, that this mount was called Dinsill, and Dinsull, but what
those words should signify he could not tell.(_c_)

Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, p. 154, tells us, that beside
those religious appellations that were given to it, it was called in
British, Cara cowz in clouz, which he interprets as the Grey rock in
the flood, a corruption of Carra clo gris en an coos; i. e.
rock-clo-grey in the wood.(_d_) Of this place Mr. Carew, and Mr.
Camden that trode in his steps, tells us, that it was the Ocrinum,
Οκρινυμ, or Ocrinium of Ptolomy and Atticus, the Greek geographers;
and yet Camden, in another place, fixes that name on the Lizard Point.

This Mount is comparatively a pyramidal crag, containing about seven
acres of land in compass; at the foot whereof, towards the land, is a
level piece of ground covered with grass, where there is a wharf, or
key, for landing goods and merchandize from the sea; also some
dwelling-houses and fish-cellars, and a cemetery for burying the dead.
To this Mount the sea daily makes its flux and reflux, and affords
safe riding and anchorage to boats, barks, and barges, with some
winds. And that which tends more to the convenience and security of
this place, that at low water it is all part of the insular continent
of Britain, and at full sea an island of itself. To which purpose thus
speaks Mr. Carew out of the Cornish Wonder Gatherer:

  Who knows not Migell’s Mount and chair,
    The pilgrim’s holy vaunt;
  Both land and island twice a day,
    Both fort and port of haunt.

For to this Mount and chapel of St. Michael devout Christians in
former ages came as pilgrims from the furthest part of this land, with
rich offerings and oblations to St. Michael’s altar, Abbat, or Prior;
also tradition tells us that in former ages this mount was parcel of
the solid lands of this parish of St. Hilary, and severed or
disjointed from it by some earthquake, terrestrial concussion, or
inundation of the sea; and to prove this, it is alleged that in the
Mount’s Bay, after some great tempests, the bodies and roots of
oak-trees have been discovered in the sand, broken up by the surges of
the sea; the like observation is made by Camden and Lhuyd on the sea
shores of Pembrokeshire, and I myself, and many others, in the moors
of Calestock Veor, Calestock Rule, Rheese, and Polgoda in Peransand,
have seen and found, deep under ground, far from the sea, in the fens
and turf lands, the bodies and roots of several oak trees, the hearts
whereof were firm and solid. But whether those seas were formerly dry
land, and the fens aforesaid the places where these trees grew (none
in those parts being now to be seen there), let others resolve; or
rather whether they are not subterraneous trees, that grew or are
generated there, as some philosophers hold and teach, under the earth.

From the foot of Mount St. Michael you ascend the hill or rock through
a narrow, crooked, craggy path to the outer portal or gate; a
considerable height on the one side, by the way in the rock, is a
small spring of water, that falls into pits made in the stones to
lodge the same, for the lower or bottom inhabitants’ use; which water
never intermits its currrent. Above the second gate there is another
spring of water issuing out of the rocks, that makes a pretty
confluence for six or seven winter months, and then intermits, which
renders the portage of it upwards much the easier for the inhabitants’
use in that season. After you pass through this second gate, betwixt a
winding and crooked path, artificially cut in the rocks on the north
side thereof, and follow the same, you arrive to the top of this
Mount, where towards the north-west is a kind of level plain, about
four or six land-yards, which gives a full prospect of the Mount’s
Bay, the British Ocean, Penzance town, Newlyn, Moushole, Gulvall,
Maddarn, Paul, and other parishes, over a downright precipice of rocks
towards the sea, at least twenty fathoms high. From this little square
or plain, there is an artificial kind of ascent also going towards the
east, which offers you a full sight of the outer walls of the castle,
and brings you to Porth-Horne, (i. e. the Iron Gate) part of which is
yet to be seen. This little fortress comprehendeth sufficient rooms
and lodgings for the captain or governor and his soldiers to reside
in, to which adjoining are several other houses or cells, heretofore
pertaining to the monks that dwelt here; all admirable for their
strength, buildings, and contrivance, on the top of a rock naturally
fortified: so that a small number of soldiers, having provision and
ammunition, might defend themselves against the greatest armies in
former ages, though I confess now, since the art of war is grown to
greater perfection in mischief and destruction, a few cannon or bombs
from the opposite hills would soon shatter it to pieces.

On this Mount, King Edward the Confessor, anno Dom. 1044, founded and
endowed an Abbey or Priory of Benedictine Monks, that is to say
Augustines reformed, with a little chapel yet standing, and dedicated
the same to the Archangel St. Michael, part whereof is now converted
to a dwelling house, in which there is yet to be seen cut in stone
three or four coats of arms, one of which was, as I remember, a
Chevron between three fleurs-de-lis.

That it had at that time considerable revenues belonging to it I make
no question, since in the Domesday Book, 20 William I. 1087,
Lan-migell was then taxed, that is to say Michael’s church or Temple,
as aforesaid. But that which renders this place most famous is the
present church or chapel and tower, cemetery, and cells cut in the
rocks for hermetical monks of the order aforesaid; built and further
endowed by William Earl of Morton and Cornwall, yet extant and kept in
good repair, with pews; to whose father, Robert Earl of Morton, King
William the Conqueror had given the lands of many rebels in those
parts, and in particular this Mount, with its appurtenances,
(dedicated as aforesaid) and created him Earl of Cornwall, whose
successors held the same by tenure of Knight Service till temp.
Charles II. Of which sort of tenures there were lately extant, in the
hundred of Penwith, thirteen knight’s fees.――Carew’s Survey of
Cornwall, p. 39. And in other hundreds three hundred more in Cornwall.

Upon the tower of this church or chapel, for it is bigger than many
other Cornish parish churches, is that celebrated place called Kader
Migell, i. e. Michael’s Chair, viz. a kind of seat artificially made
or cut in the stones on the top of its tower, very dangerous in the
access and tremendous to behold.

Contrary to this description, Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, p.
154, tells us that St. Michael’s Chair is a bad seat, in a craggy
place without the castle, dangerous for the access and therefore holy
for the adventure; so that I conceive he had this report by hearsay,
not ocular demonstration. In this chapel are yet to be seen the
tombstones of several persons there interred, in the rocks, (with a
small quantity of earth, though without the chapel there is a bank of
earth, brought there by art for burying the dead,) but the
inscriptions on those tombstones are so obliterated with dust and
time, that I had not leisure much to examine them. The roof and timber
of this temple is yet so firm and uniformly kept in repair, that no
decay, moth, or spider’s web are to be seen in the roof thereof, which
gives occasion to a conjecture that the same was all built of Irish
oak, which drives that poisonous creature the spider from it. Certes,
this fabrick is not only an evident proof of the great skill which
former ages, in William the Conqueror’s days, had in the art of
architecture, but that many other such of much later erection can
hardly equal the same, though it has stood firm above six hundred
years.

This abbey or priory of Benedictine Monks of St. Michael, after the
donation thereof by the Conqueror to his nephew Robert Earl of Morton
aforesaid, was by him annexed and made subject for religious matters
to the Abbey of Mount St. Michael in Normandy, under which
circumstance it stood till the French wars, temp. Henry V. 1414, when
the Statute, made 1380, in the reign of King Richard II. was put in
force, for suppressing alien priories (who secretly communicated the
state affairs to foreigners). King Henry V. or VI. then gave this
Alien Priory of St. Michael to Sion Abbey in Middlesex, under which
rule and jurisdiction it remained till 26 Henry VIII., 1533, when it
was dissolved; when, I take it, it passed in value with Sion, since
the Monasticon Anglicanum does not mention it separate.

The Mount is now in possession of Sir John Saintaubyn, (formerly
Bassett) who for melancholy retirement dwelleth here. It is still
privileged with royalties over the Mount’s Bay, as far north as Long
Bridge in the manor of Lanesely, with wrecks, anchorage of ships,
quayage or wharfage of goods, and with keeping annual fairs on the sea
shore near it, September 29, Monday after Midlent Sunday. Round this
Mount, for two leagues space, is an indifferent safe road for
anchorage of ships, when the wind is proper for it; and here, as
Froissart saith, landed Sir Robert Knollys, a valiant commander of the
Black Prince’s in the French wars temp. Edward III. (who drew the
traitor Sir Perducas D’Albert from the French to the English army, to
which afterwards he returned again most perfidiously,) where he had
been highly instrumental in taking the forts of Froyns, Roach,
Vandower, Ville Franck, and other places for the English; from hence
he went to London by land, was graciously received and plentifully
rewarded for his good services by King Edward III.


PART II.

This Mount, from the time of King Edward the Confessor to the middle
of the reign of King Richard I. for the space of 150 years, was a
sacred nursery of religion; but then, notwithstanding the sanctity
thereof, and the guardianship of St. Michael, it was seized by one
Henry de la Pomeray, Lord of Berry-Pomeray in Devon, and Tregony
Pomeray in this county, being distasted at the government of King
Richard I. as many others were, by reason of the Pope’s request he
engaged in the Holy War, and forsook his kingdom, leaving for his
vicegerent William Longchamp, a Norman Bishop of Ely; who had extorted
great sums of money from the people in his absence, without a
Parliament; and moreover so insulted over the nobility and gentry of
this kingdom in his office, that he discontented the greatest part of
them; and to countenance his grandeur he seldom rode abroad with less
than a thousand attendants. Those and others his exorbitances gave
occasion to John Earl of Cornwall and others to fall into treasonable
practices, and of this number it seems this Sir Pomeray was one, who
not only informed the King beyond the seas of these topping,
magisterial, and illegal practices of Longchamp at home, but that by
reason thereof King Philip of France, in those distractions, took
occasion with a great army of soldiers to invade Normandy, and had
taken the town of Guisors and many other places by force and arms, and
would reduce the whole province in short while (if not resisted) to
his dominion. Whereupon the King, in answer, by his letters patent,
deposed Longchamp from his authority, and placed the Archbishop of
Rouen in his place, when soon after Longchamp, in women’s apparel,
made his escape into his own country, but was detected and shrewdly
beaten with rods before his departure out of England, by the women
there.

Longchamp, as tradition saith, having notice that de la Pomeray was in
confederacy with Earl John, who under pretence of opposing his
vice-government, designed the usurpation of King Richard’s Crown,
(though he had told him that in case his brother should die, before he
returned into his kingdom, without issue, that the right of succession
was in Arthur Duke of Britany, his elder brother’s son, not him,) sent
a sergeant at arms to the castle of Berry Pomeray in Devon, where he
then resided, in order to arrest and take him into custody, which he
no sooner did but Pomeray stabbed him to the heart, of which wound he
instantly died. Upon which tragical accident the murderer fled into
Cornwall, where he had great possessions in lands, and besides twelve
lordships held by the tenure of knight service. And there cast himself
upon his amicus, John Earl of that province, who as tradition saith
secretly supplied him with divers men at arms to secure his person
against his enemy the Viceroy, which accordingly they did till
Longchamp was displaced.

Afterwards, notice being given that King Richard was taken prisoner
coming from the Holy War, 1194, by Leopold, Archduke of Austria in
Germany, and cast into his prison called Trivalis, in which no man
before was known to be put that escaped with life, this news prompted
Pomeray from the sin of murder to that of rebellion; resolving to
reduce this Mount of St. Michael to Earl John’s dominion, and to place
himself therein for better safety. In order to which he found out this
expedient, to go with his guard of armed men that daily attended him
in disguise to that place, under pretence of visiting a sister that he
had amongst the religious people there;(_e_) who upon discovering who
he was, and the occasion of his coming, had the gates opened, where he
entered with his followers, who soon after discovered under their
clothes their weapons of war, and declared their design was for
reducing the Mount to the dominion and use of John Earl of Cornwall,
and that if any person opposed them therein, they would revenge it
upon him to the loss of their lives; whereupon, he commanded the Prior
and his monks to deliver him the keys of the gates, and possession of
the houses thereof for common uses, though therein they much
discommoded the monks with their soldiers. Nevertheless, for fear of
greater damage, they patiently submitted to his pleasure; who
thereupon with his soldiers fortified the place, and so made it
comparatively impregnable, and so there lived in great pomp and
triumph for some time, not expecting ever to hear that King Richard
was in the land of the living, or delivered from prison, it being for
some time reported he was dead. But, alas! many times common fame is a
common liar, and all men are apt to believe such matters and things as
they would willingly have come to pass, or stand well affected to.

But contrary to the expectation of Pomeray and his confederates, King
Richard, after fifteen months’ durance in prison, was ransomed for one
hundred thousand pounds, and returned safe to London; when he found
his brother John formidable, and making way to his crown, having got
possession of the castles of Lancaster, Marlborough, Nottingham, St.
Michael’s Mount, and other fortresses, into which he had placed
governors and soldiers. Whereupon, in order to reduce those places,
King Richard raised a considerable army; at the news whereof Earl John
fled into France, and was by his brother deprived of all his
possessions in England: notwithstanding which, the garrisons aforesaid
stood firm to Earl John’s interest, till at the siege of Vernoil in
Normandy, he fled from the French army to that of his brother, threw
down his arms and submitted to his mercy; whereupon he was restored to
all his lands and dignities, both in Normandy and England. But
notwithstanding this concord and agreement between King Richard and
his brother John, the castles aforesaid stood out, and would not
surrender for some time after, especially this Mount, which Pomeray
commanded. Whereupon King Richard commanded Richard Revell, then
sheriff of Cornwall, with his posse comitatus, to assist Hubert
Walter, Archbishop of Canterbury, Chief Justice and Lord Chancellor of
England, whom he had sent as his general into Cornwall to besiege St.
Michael’s Mount, and reduce Pomeray to his duty and allegiance; which
army of men, and bands of soldiers, no sooner approached the same (as
Hoveden saith) and gave him summons, but the sight of the numerous
army he was to contend with so affrighted Pomeray and his
confederates, that forthwith, without resistance, he surrendered the
garrison on mercy to the said Walter, for the use of King Richard,
1194, at the consideration of which and his other facts, through
trouble of mind he soon after died, as despairing of pardon.

Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, tells us, by report of some of
his posterity, that he made his will and bequeathed part of his lands
to the monks of St. Michael’s Mount, others to the Knights of St. John
of Jerusalem, to pray for his soul; the remainder descended to his
heir (which we have no reason to doubt of, since Henry de la Pomeray,
one of his posterity, 3 Henry IV. at Tregony, held twelve knights’
fees of land in Cornwall, id. Mr. Carew); having so done, he caused
himself to be blooded to death, to make his bequests good and valid in
law; after his death King Richard restored the prior and his monks to
the full possession of their cells, revenues, and chapel; and in de la
Pomeray’s fort, he placed a small garrison of soldiers, to defend the
same against sudden invasion of enemies; and in this condition St.
Michael’s Mount remained from the year 1196 to the year 1471, 275
years, manned out with carnal and spiritual soldiers.(_f_)


PART III.

Richard de Vere, the eleventh Earl of Oxford, married Alice, one of
the daughters and coheirs of Sir Richard Sergeaulx, knight, Lord of
Collquite and Killygarth, widow of Guy Seyntaubyn, Sheriff of Cornwall
22 Richard II. 1399; but she passed her lands from her son by her
first husband, to her second husband the Earl of Oxford, who had issue
by her John de Vere, the 12th Earl of Oxford, who married Elizabeth,
daughter of Sir John Howard Knight; the which John, the 12th Earl, was
the chief of those barons that opposed the precedence in parliament of
the Lords Spiritual, temp. Henry VI. the which Parliament roll in the
Tower of London, is thus endorsed:

MEMORANDUM.――The Lords Spiritual alleged that, forasmuch as they were
spiritual Barons, they ought to have the right of precedence of the
Lords Temporal, for it was well known how far things spiritual
exceeded carnal or temporal. To which this Earl of Oxford replied on
behalf of the Lords Temporal, that whatsoever right or privilege they
had or could challenge, [see Brooke on Oxford, Earl,] it came from
them and their ancestors, and their almsdeeds, who had been the worthy
founders and benefactors of the Lords Spiritual; and further said it
was an unseemly thing for masters to be inferior to their servants,
who were descended of regal, honourable, and noble families, which
most of the Spiritual Barons were not; which matter being fully
understood, and indifferently heard, the Lords Temporal, by means of
the logic and rhetoric of this Earl, had then the precedence of place
in Parliament given them. But, alas! this bold demand, question, and
argument of his, at that time, was a project rather pitied than
admired by his best friends, for though it succeeded well in one
Parliament, it got him many enemies in another. So that in the
Parliament, held 2d November, 1462, tempore Edward IV., this Earl, and
his son Aubrey, were attainted of treason against that King, on
the behalf of Henry VI., and both beheaded without trial or
answer.――(Baker’s Chronicle, page 204.)

Whereupon John, his second son, succeeded, and was the 13th Earl of
Oxford, who married Margaret daughter of Richard Nevill, Earl of
Salisbury, who, as his father had done before, adhered to the interest
of King Henry VI., against Edward IV., and was at the battle of Barnet
Heath 1471, and had, with the Marquess Montacute, the command of the
right wing of King Henry’s horse, under Richard Earl of Warwick,
general of his army; and when in the battle, it appeared the vanward
of King Henry’s horse had somewhat worsted King Edward’s party, by the
valour of the Earl of Oxford, the news presently fled to London that
Warwick had obtained the victory; but, alas! Fama est mendax; for
immediately after a strange misfortune befel the Earl of Oxford and
his men in the latter part of this encounter. They having a star with
streams on their liveries, as King Edward’s soldiers had the sun, the
General Warwick’s men, by reason of a great mist, (raised as was
thought by the magic art of Friar Bungey) mistaking the badges, shot
at the Earl of Oxford’s men, which were of their own party, to their
great hurt and destruction; whereupon the Earl, seeing how matters
went, cried out treason, and forthwith fled with 800 men, whose
departure gave King Edward opportunity to obtain a total victory over
his enemies.

Whereupon the Duke of Somerset and this Earl of Oxford fled to Jasper
Earl of Pembroke, in Wales, for safety and protection; from whence
Oxford, and a convenient number of men of arms, shipped themselves
from Milfordhaven, and with a fair wind sailed down St. George’s
Channel, turned the Land’s End, and came safely at anchor in this
Mount’s Bay. Where, as soon as the Earl and his men had disguised
themselves in pilgrims’ and friars’ apparel, under which all had
lodged a small sword and a dagger, they went on shore, pretending that
they were pilgrims that had come a long pilgrimage from the remotest
part of this kingdom, to perform the penance imposed upon them by
their father confessors, and to perform their vows, make orisons and
oblations to the altar of St. Michael, who presided there; upon which
pious pretext the monks and inhabitants opened their gates and let
them into the castle, where they were no sooner entered, but, as de la
Pomeray had done before, they shewed their weapons, discovered their
impious fraud, and made known who they were, and their designs to kill
all persons that made resistance or opposed King Henry VI. for whom
the Earl of Oxford was come to take possession of this Mount, and
would keep it to his use; whereupon, the monks and the small garrison
were necessitated to comply with their demands, and yield them a quiet
possession thereof; which forthwith the Earl put in better repair, and
by the interest of King Henry and the Earl’s friends and relations in
those parts, his grandmother as aforesaid being Sir Guy St. Aubyn’s
widow and Sergeaulx’s coheir, he soon got ammunition, provision, and
soldiers sufficient for their defence.

As soon as King Edward IV. heard of the surprise of St. Michael’s
Mount by the Earl of Oxford, he issued forth his proclamation,
proclaiming him and all his adherents traitors, and then consulted how
to regain both to his obedience; and in order thereto he forthwith
sent to Sir John Arundell of Trerice, Knight, then Sheriff of
Cornwall, to reduce and besiege the same by his posse comitatus; which
gentleman, pursuant to his orders, and by virtue of his office, soon
rose a considerable army of men and soldiers within his bailiwick, and
marched with them towards St. Michael’s Mount, where being arrived he
sent a trumpeter to the Earl with a summons of surrender of that
garrison to him for King Edward upon mercy; especially for that in so
doing, in all probability, he would prevent the effusion of much
Christian blood.

To this summons of the trumpeter the Earl sent a flat denial; saying
further, that rather than he would yield the fort on those terms,
himself and those with him were all resolved to lose their lives in
defence thereof. Whereupon the Sheriff commanded his soldiers, being
very numerous on all parts, to storm the Mount, and reduce it by
force; but, alas! maugre all their attempts (of this kind) the
besieged so well defended every part of this rocky mountain that in
all places the Sheriff’s men were repulsed with some loss; and the
besieged issued forth from the outer gate and pursued them with such
violence, that the said Sir John Arundell and some others were slain
upon the sands at the foot of the Mount, to the great discouragement
of the new-raised soldiers, who quickly departed thence, having lost
their leader; leaving the besieged in better heart than they found
them, as much elevated at their good success as themselves were
dismayed at their bad fortune. This Sir John Arundell, as Mr. Carew,
in his Survey of Cornwall, tells us, p. 119, had long before been told
by some fortune-teller that he should be slain in the sands;
wherefore, to avoid that destiny, he removed from Efford, near
Stratton on the sands, where he dwelt, to Trerice, far off from the
sea-sands, yet by this misfortune fulfilled the prediction in another
place.

King Edward, upon news of this tragical accident, forthwith ordered
letters patent to be drawn for making John Fortescue, Esq. Sheriff of
Cornwall, in the place of Sir John Arundell, slain as aforesaid; who
being accordingly sworn in that office, received the same commands,
and took the same measures for reducing the Mount as the former
Sheriff had done, by summons and assault, but was always, and in all
places, repulsed with dishonour and loss, the same being as stoutly
defended within as it was assaulted without; the fort thus appearing
invincible. All which circumstances being transmitted to King Edward
by Mr. Fortescue, the Sheriff, the King, for prevention of further
bloodshed, ordered him to have a parley with the said Earl of Oxford,
and know what his designs and expectations were; who thereupon sent a
messenger to him for that purpose; from whom he received this resolute
and desperate answer,――that, if the King would pardon the offences of
him and his adherents, and grant them their lives, liberties, and
estates, that then he would yield up the fort to his use; otherwise
they would fight it out to the last man. Which answer being sent up to
the King, he granted their request; and forthwith ordered a
proclamation of free pardon to be made unto them, under the broad seal
of England; which, with all convenient speed was sent down, and by Mr.
Sheriff Fortescue delivered to the Earl, to the great quiet and
content of all parties. Whereupon the fort was yielded to him for the
King’s use; and the Earl of Oxford was soon after sent prisoner to the
castle of Hamms, in Normandy, where he was continued a prisoner till
the first year of King Henry VII. 1485, with whom he came into
England, and led the vanward of his army at Bosworth Field against
King Richard III. where he was slain. After the death of this Earl’s
first wife, he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Richard Scrope,
Knight, widow of William Lord Beaumont, by whom he had no issue; so
that, he dying the 4th Henry VIII. left John, the son of George Vere
his brother, his heir and successor, and the fourteenth Earl of
Oxford, who gave for his arms, Gules, escartellé de Or, le premier
brisé d’un molette de Argent.

King Edward attributed this ineffectual long siege of St. Michael’s
Mount either to the cowardice or disloyalty of the Sheriffs and
country people of Cornwall; but there was no just cause for this
conjecture, since Sir John Arundell and several of his men lost their
lives about it: at other times, he would say the inhabitants were more
affected to the house of Lancaster than that of York; whereupon, when
the said Mr. Fortescue went out of his office after four years’
service, he made his brother Richard Duke of Gloucester Sheriff of
Cornwall during life; for that he was often heard to say he looked
upon Cornwall only as the back-door of rebellion; so that those
several persons set down in the catalogue of Sheriffs of Cornwall
after Fortescue, were not absolute Sheriffs, but Deputies under the
said Duke, viz. Daubeny, Carnesew, Willoughby, Nanfon, Grenvill,
Fullford, Treffry, Terrill, and Houghton, who stiled themselves
Vicecomes, and their under Sheriffs Sub-Vicecomes.


PART IV.

About the year of our Lord 1496, when James IV. King of Scotland, upon
a truce with King Henry VII. of England, had expulsed from Scotland
that counterfeit sham Prince, Perkin Warbeck (the pretended Richard of
Shrewsbury, youngest son of King Edward IV. who had before been
murdered in the Tower), to whom he had given in marriage his near
kinswoman the Lady Katherine Gordon; he, together with his wife and
family, sailed from thence over into Ireland, to seek friendship there
of the rebels and all others well affected to the House of York; where
being arrived, and fortune favouring him according to his expectation,
news was brought him there that the Cornish rebels were ready to renew
their former hostility, and venture their lives in battle upon the
title of the house of York against that of Lancaster, had they a
valiant and able General to lead them, notwithstanding Flammock and
his confederates under the same engagement were defeated and executed
in 1495.

These tidings were very acceptable to Perkin; who thereupon consulted
his privy councillors, Hearn, Astley, and Skelton, a mercer, a tailor,
and a scrivener, all bankrupts; these all agree, nemine contradicente,
that his four ships of war should forthwith be rigged and manned for
an expedition into Cornwall; which accordingly being prepared, himself
with his lady, and 120 soldiers, embarked thereon, and being favoured
with a fair wind, took his leave of his Irish friends, and in the
month of September, 1499, 15th Henry VII. (Carew’s Survey of Cornwall,
p. 98,) came safely to anchor in St. Michael’s Mount’s Bay; where soon
after he landed, and went up to the Mount, and made himself known to
the monks and other inhabitants, publishing himself to be the true and
real Richard of Shrewsbury aforesaid, the true heir of the House of
York; which the monks, greatly affected to that title, were so very
ready to believe, that they yielded the Mount and garrison without
resistance into his hands; who presently renewed the old
fortifications, and put the same into a better posture of defence.

Which having done, himself with a band of soldiers marched from thence
to Bodmin (where the rendezvous of Flammock’s rebels in those parts
formerly was,) in which place, by false words and promises, he so
prevailed with the discontented rebels of that town and contiguous
country, that he soon got together, without money or reward, at least
three thousand men that could bear arms; these he divided into
companies, and bands, and regiments, under Captains, Majors, and
Colonels expert in war to instruct them in military discipline, till
at length his army grew to six thousand well-armed soldiers. Whereupon
King Henry VII. having notice of Perkin’s landing and formidableness
in these parts, ordered Sir Peter Edgecombe, Knight, then Sheriff of
Cornwall (whose father, Sir Richard Edgecombe, Knight, was one of that
King’s Privy Councillors, and had comparatively been raised to his
great estate by his boon and favour), that he should forthwith, by
virtue of his office, raise the country, and give battle to this
counterfeit Richard of Shrewsbury and his confederate rebels.
Whereupon, the Sheriff did as he was commanded, and raised an army of
twenty thousand men, as tradition saith, and led them towards Bodmin;
but when they approached near, and saw Perkin entrenched at Castle
Keynock, on the east hill of Bodmin Downs, with the body of his army,
and divers troops of horse and bands of foot placed towards Lanhydrock
and the roads from Cardenham, in order to resist and oppose the
Sheriff, his men resolved to march no further, but to return from
whence they came without giving battle. Which accordingly they did
(notwithstanding the Sheriff’s threats and commands to the contrary),
in great terror and confusion and astonishment; but whether this fear
proceeded from the cowardice of the Sheriff and his men, or their
disaffection to the Lancastrian dominion of King Henry, is uncertain,
for the like fact was committed two years before by the posse
comitatus of John Basset, of Tehidy, then Sheriff, which he had raised
to suppress Flammock’s rebellion.

Upon news of this flight and disbanding of the Sheriff’s men, Perkin
was saluted by his soldiers and confederates as King of England: and
soon after, not only in his camp, but in divers places of Bodmin town,
was proclaimed by a trumpeter and others, King of England and France,
and Lord of Ireland, with great shouts and acclamations of the people,
and bonefires, by the name of Richard IV. And it is reported he
assumed majesty with such a boon grace and affable deportment, that
immediately he won the affections and admiration of all who made
addresses unto him; in which art of kingship he had long before been
educated and instructed by his pretended aunt, Margaret Duchess of
Burgundy, sister to King Edward IV. which he had also acted to the
good liking of all that saw him in Burgundian, Irish, Scots, and
French courts. And, moreover, besides his magisterial port and mien,
being an incomparable counterfeit, natural crafty, liar and
dissembler, “Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare,” as the old
proverb saith; so that in short time he grew to be so popular and
formidable about Bodmin that no power durst oppose him there. But,
alas! this Cornish regniculum gave him not content, for his pride and
ambition put him upon further expedients, viz. to get possession of
the whole kingdom of England, and reduce it also to his obedience; in
order to which, with a well-prepared army of four thousand men and two
thousand of other sorts, he marched out of Cornwall into Devon, where
met him also great numbers of volunteers of that county and Somerset,
that joined with his forces; the dread whereof so terrified James
Chudleigh, Esq. then Sheriff of Devon, and the power of his bailiwick
raised to stop his march to Exeter, that they durst not give him
battle or obstruct his passage till he came before that city, pitched
his camp, and laid siege thereto.

Upon whose approaches the citizens shut their gates and prepared to
defend themselves; when soon after he sent a message or summons to
them in the name of Richard IV. King of England, commanding them to
surrender the same to him upon their allegiance: but the citizens so
ridiculed his pretended title, and slighted his summons, that by his
own messenger they gave him defiance; at which time Dr. Richard Redman
was Lord Bishop of Exeter; William Burgoigne, Esq. Recorder; William
Frost, Mayor; Francis Gilbert, Sword-bearer; John Bucknam, William
Wilkinson, John Doncaster, and Richard Howse, were Stewards, or
Bailiffs; John Clodworthy, John Bonifant, Philip Bullock, John Wilkin,
Nicholas Auburne, John Atwell, William York, Thomas Lanwordaby, Philip
Binks, John Slugg, Thomas Andrews, Thomas Oliver, and others,
Aldermen. See Isaack’s Memorials of Exeter, 1499.

Soon after this defiance given, Perkin and his soldiers surrounded the
city walls, and attempted to scale the same in several places daily
for some time, but always were repulsed with considerable loss by the
valour of the citizens. During which siege they sent to King Henry for
his aid and assistance in this great distress; whereupon the Lord
Daubeny was ordered to raise forces and march towards Exeter
therewith, in order to remove the siege thereof; but before he came,
Edward Courtenay, sixteenth Earl of Devon, and the Lord William his
son, accompanied with Sir Edmund Carew, Sir Thomas Fulford, Sir
William Courtenay, Sir John Halwell, Sir John Croker, Walter
Courtenay, Peter Edgecombe, William St. Maur, Richard Whiteleigh of
Efford (Sheriff of Devon the year after), Richard Hals of Kenedon,
John Fortescue of Vallapit, James Chudleigh aforesaid, and other
gentlemen of those parts, had raised a considerable army of soldiers,
with which they marched towards the rebels. At the sight of whose
approach Perkin and his host were as much dispirited then as they were
elevated before; whereupon he called a council of war, in which it was
unanimously agreed upon, that it was not advisable to give them
battle, being at least ten thousand fighting men, but to dislodge from
their trenches, and leave the siege of that place, and forthwith to
march into Somersetshire, a country better affected to King Perkin,
where he might raise more soldiers. Accordingly, this order of council
was observed and put in practice, so that the night after Perkin and
all his army marched towards Taunton; where he mustered his men as if
he intended to give battle; but when, by the muster-roll, he saw what
numbers of men had deserted him in his nightly march from Exeter,
falling then much short of six thousand, and further, notice being
brought him that King Henry was in pursuit of him with a much greater
army, he foresaw the worst, and doubted that fortune would favour him
no longer in his military and regal practices; and therefore
contrived, for the preservation of himself, with sixty horse troopers,
to forsake his army by night, and fly to the Abbey of Beauley, in
Southampton, as resting upon the name and privilege of the place,
where he took sanctuary. As soon as King Henry understood Perkin had
deserted his soldiers and had taken sanctuary at Beauley, he forthwith
ordered a band of soldiers to guard and surround that Abbey to prevent
his escape beyond the seas (from whence it appears that at that time
the privilege of sanctuary was allowed to traitors). So that Perkin,
despairing of getting thence, submitted to the King’s mercy, and was
committed prisoner to the Tower of London; from whence he made an
escape, and fled to the Priory of Sheen, at Richmond; where, on
condition of making a true confession who he was, in a pair of stocks
set before Westminster Hall door, and true answer make to such
questions as should be demanded of him, the Prior got the King’s
pardon for him. And accordingly, he sat in the stocks a whole day
before Westminster Hall door, afterwards on a scaffold in Cheapside,
openly reading, declaring, and giving manuscripts under his own hand,
wherein he told his parentage, the place of his birth, the passages of
his life; that he was a cheat, an impostor, and by what ways and means
he was drawn into those treasonable and bloody attempts and practices,
&c. After which he was again committed to the Tower of London, where
endeavouring to make an escape, he was afterwards, with others,
executed at Tyburn.

After Perkin took sanctuary at Beauley, his soldiers from about
Taunton and elsewhere, were all brought to Exeter; where King Henry,
in St. Peter’s church-yard, pardoned them all, on their promise of
being good subjects afterwards. But some of them were not so good as
their word. King Henry also then sent the Lord Daubeny to St.
Michael’s Mount for Perkin’s wife, the Lady Katherine Gordon, whom he
brought to King Henry; who commiserating her youth, birth, and beauty,
bestowed a competent maintenance upon her, which she enjoyed during
that King’s life and long after, to her dying day.


PART V.

This Priory, or Abbey, being dissolved by act of Parliament, and given
to the King, 33d Henry VIII. 1542, he gave the revenues and government
of the place to Humphry Arundell, Esq. of the Lanherne family, who
enjoyed the same till the first year of King Edward VI. 1549; at which
time that King set forth several injunctions about religion: amongst
others, this was one, viz. that all images found in churches, for
divine worship or otherwise, should be pulled down and cast forth out
of those churches; and that all preachers should perswade the people
from praying to saints or for the dead; and from the use of beads,
ashes, processions, masses, dirges, and praying to God publicly in an
unknown tongue; and least there should be a defect of preachers as to
those points, homilies were made and ordered to be read in all
churches. Pursuant to this injunction one Mr. Body, a commissioner for
pulling down images in the churches of Cornwall, going to do his duty
in Helston church, a priest, in company with Killtor of Kevorne and
others, at unawares stabbed him in the body with a knife; of which
wound he instantly fell dead in that place. And though the murderer
was taken and sent up to London, tried, found guilty of wilful murder
in Westminster Hall, and executed in Smithfield, yet the Cornish
people flocked together in a tumultuous and rebellious manner by the
instigation of their priests in diverse parts of the shire or county,
and committed many barbarities and outrages in the same; and though
the justices of the peace apprehended several of them, and sent them
to jail, yet they could not with all their power suppress the growth
of their insurrection; for soon after Humphry Arundell aforesaid,
Governor of this Mount, sided with those mutineers, and broke out into
actual rebellion against his and their Prince. The mutineers chose him
for the General of their army, and for inferior officers as Captains,
Majors, and Colonels,――John Rosogan, James Rosogan, Will. Winslade of
Tregarrick or St. Agnes at Mithian, John Payne of St. Ives, Robert
Bochym of Bochym, and his brother, Thomas Underhill, John Salmon,
William Segar; together with several priests, rectors, vicars, and
curates of churches, as John Thompson, Roger Barret, John Woolcock,
William Asa, James Mourton, John Barrow, Richard Bennet, and others,
who mustered their soldiers according to the rules of military
discipline at Bodmin, where the general rendezvous was appointed. But
no sooner was the General Arundell departed from St. Michael’s Mount
to exert his power in the camp and field aforesaid, but diverse
gentlemen, with their wives and families, in his absence possessed
themselves thereof; whereupon he dispatched a party of horse and foot
to reduce his old garrison; which quickly they effected, by reason the
besieged wanted provision and ammunition, and were distracted with the
women and children’s fears and cries, and so they yielded the
possession to their enemies on condition of free liberty of departing
forthwith from thence with life, though not without being plundered.

The retaking of St. Michael’s Mount by the general Arundell proved
much to the content and satisfaction of his army at Bodmin, consisting
of about six thousand men, which they looked upon as a good omen of
their future success, and the first-fruits of the valour and conduct
of their general. Whereupon the confederates daily increased his army
with great numbers of men from all parts, who listed themselves under
his banner, which was not only pourtrayed, but by a cart brought into
the field for their encouragement, viz. the pyx under its canopy, that
is to say, the vessel containing the Roman host, or sacramental
sacrifice, or body of Christ, together with crosses, banners,
candlesticks, holy bread and water, to defend them from devils and the
adverse power; (see Fox’s Martyrology, p. 669,) which was carried
wheresoever the camp removed; which camp grew so tremendously
formidable at Bodmin, that Job Militon, Esq. then Sheriff of Cornwall,
with all the power of his bailiwick, durst not encounter with it
during the time of the general’s stay in that place, which gave him
and his rebels opportunity to consult together for the good of their
public interest, and to make out a declaration, or manifesto, of the
justice of their cause, and grounds of taking up arms; but the army,
in general, consisting of a mixed multitude of men of diverse
professions, trades, and employments, could not easily agree upon the
subject matter and form thereof. Some would have no justice of the
peace, for that generally they were ignorant of the laws, and could
not construe or English a Latin bill of indictment without the clerk
of the peace’s assistance, who imposed upon them, with other
attornies, for gain, wrong sense, and judgment; besides, in
themselves, they were corrupt and partial in determining cases; others
would have no lawyers nor attornies, for that the one cheated the
people in wrong advice or counsel, and the other of their money by
extravagant bills of costs; others would have no court leets, or court
barons, for that the cost and expense in prosecuting an action at law
therein was many times greater than the debt or profit. But generally
it was agreed upon amongst them, that no inclosure should be left
standing, but that all lands should be held in common; yet what
expedients should be found out and placed in the room of those several
orders and degrees of men and officers, none could prescribe.

However, the priests, rectors, vicars, and curates, the priors, monks,
friars, and other dissolved collegiates, hammered out seven articles
of address for the King’s majesty; upon grant of which they declared
their bodies, arms, and goods should all be at his disposal, viz.

1. That curates should administer baptism at all times of need, as
well week days as holy days.

2. That their children might be confirmed by the Bishop.

3. That mass might be celebrated, no man communicating with the
priest.

4. That they might have reservation of the Lord’s body in churches.

5. That they might have holy bread and water in remembrance of
Christ’s body and blood.

6. That priests might not be married.

7. That the six articles set forth by King Henry VIII. might be
continued at least till the King came of age.

Now those six articles were invented by Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of
Winchester (who was the bastard son of Lionel Woodvill, Bishop of
Salisbury, by his concubine, Elizabeth Gardiner; the which Lionel was
fifth son of Richard Woodvill, Earl Rivers, 1470), and therefore
called his creed, viz.

1. That the body of Christ is really present in the sacrament after
consecration.

2. That the sacrament cannot truly be administered under both kinds.

3. That priests entered into holy orders might not marry.

4. That vows of chastity entered into upon mature deliberation, were
to be kept.

5. That private masses were not to be omitted.

6. That auricular confession was necessary in the church of God.

To those demands of the Cornish rebels the King so far condescended as
to send an answer in writing to every article, and also a general
pardon to every one of them if they would lay down arms. (See Fox’s
Acts and Monuments, Book ix. p. 668.) But, alas! those overtures of
the King were not only rejected by the rebels, but made them the more
bold and desperate; especially finding themselves unable longer to
subsist upon their own estates and money, or the bounty of the
country, which hitherto they had done. The general therefore resolved,
as the fox who seldom chucks at home, to prey upon other men’s goods
and estates further off, for his army’s better subsistence. Whereupon
he dislodged from Bodmin, and marched with his soldiers into Devon,
where Sir Peter Carew, Knight, was ready to obstruct their passage
with his posse comitatus. But when they saw the order and discipline
of the rebels, and that their army consisted of above six thousand
fighting men, desperate, well-armed, and prepared for battle, the
Sheriff and his troops permitted them quietly to pass through the
heart of that country to Exeter; where the citizens, upon notice of
their approaches (as formerly done), shut the gates, and put
themselves in a posture of defence. At which time Dr. John Voysey was
Bishop of Exeter, viz. 10th July, 1549, John Blacaler was Mayor,
William Tothill was Sheriff, Lewis Pollard, Recorder, William
Beaumont, Sword-bearer; John Drake, Geffery Arundell, Henry Maunder,
and John Tooker, were Bailiffs or Stewards; Thomas Prestwood, John
Maynard, John Webb, William Hals, Hugh Pope, William Hurst, Nicholas
Limmet, Robert Midwinter, Henry Booth, John Berry, John Britnall, John
Tuckfield, John Stawell, Edward Bridgman, Thomas Grigg, John Drake,
Thomas Skidmore, John Bodley, and others (all which had before that
time been Mayors), Stewards or Bailiffs of the city.――See Isaack’s
Memorials of Exeter, p. 122.

Things being in this posture, the general Arundell summoned the
citizens to deliver their town and castle to his dominion; but they
sent him a flat denial. Whereupon, forthwith he ordered his men to
fire the gates of the city, which accordingly they did; but the
citizens on the inside supplied those fires with such quantities of
combustible matter, so long till they had cast up a half-moon on the
inside thereof, upon which, when the rebels attempted to enter, they
were shot to death or cut in pieces. Their entrance being thus
obstructed at the gates, they put in practice other expedients, viz.
either to undermine the walls or blow them up with barrels of
gunpowder, which they had placed in the same; but the citizens also
prevented this their design, by countermining their mines and casting
so much water on the places where their powder barrels were lodged,
that the powder would not take fire. Thus stratagems of war were daily
practised between the besieged and besiegers, to the great hurt and
damage of each other.

King Edward being informed by his council of this siege, and that
there was little or no dependance upon the valour and conduct of the
Sheriff of Devon, and his bailiwick, to suppress this rebellion or
raise the siege of Exeter, granted his commission to John Lord
Russell, created Baron Russell of Tavistock by King Henry, and Lord
High Admiral and Lord Privy Seal, an old experienced soldier who had
lost an eye at the siege of Montrueil in France, to be his general for
raising soldiers to fight those rebels; who forthwith, pursuant
thereto, raised a considerable army and marched with them to Honiton;
but when he came there he was informed that the enemy consisted of ten
thousand able fighting men armed; which occasioned his halting there
longer than he intended, expecting greater supplies of men, that were
coming to his aid under conduct of the Lord Grey; which at length
arrived and joined his forces, whereupon he dislodged from thence and
marched towards Exeter; where on the way he had several sharp
conflicts with the rebels with various success, sometimes the better
and sometimes the worse; though at length, after much fatigue of war,
maugre all opposition and resistance of the rebels, he forced them to
raise their siege, and entered the city of Exeter with relief, 6th
August, 1549, after thirty-two days’ siege; wherein the inhabitants
had valiantly defended themselves, though in that extremity they were
necessitated by famine to eat horses, moulded cloth, and bread made of
bran; in reward of whose loyalty King Edward gave to the city for ever
the manor of Evyland, since sold by the city for making the river Exe
navigable.

After raising the siege as aforesaid, the general Arundell rallied his
routed forces of rebels, and gave battle to the Lord Russell and the
King’s army, with that inveterate courage, animosity, and resolution,
that the greatest part of his men were slain upon the spot, others
threw down their arms on mercy, the remainder fled, and were
afterwards many of them taken and executed. Sir Anthony Kingston,
Knight, a Gloucestershire man, after this rebellion was made Provost
Marshal for executing such western rebels as could be taken, or were
made prisoners in Cornwall and Devon, together with all such who had
been aiders or assisters of them in that rebellion; upon whom,
according to his power and office, he executed martial law with sport
and justice (as Mr. Carew and other historians tell us); and the
principal persons that have come to my knowledge, over whose misery he
triumphed, was Boyer the Mayor of Bodmin; Mayow of Clevyan, in St.
Colomb Major, whom he hanged at the tavern sign-post in that town, of
whom tradition saith his crime was not capital; and therefore his wife
was advised by her friends to hasten to the town after the Marshal and
his men, who had him in custody, and beg his life. Which accordingly
she prepared to do, and to render herself the more amiable petitioner
before the Marshal’s eyes, this dame spent so much time in attiring
herself and putting on her French hood then in fashion, that her
husband was put to death before her arrival. In like manner the
Marshal hanged one John Payne, the Mayor, or Portreeve of St. Ives, on
a gallows erected in the middle of that town, whose arms are still to
be seen in one of the fore-seats in that church, viz. in a plain field
three pine apples. Besides those he executed many more in other places
in Cornwall, that had been actors, assisters, or promoters of this
rebellion. Lastly, it is further memorable of this Sir Anthony
Kingston, that in Sir John Heywood’s Chronicle he is taxed of extreme
cruelty in doing his Marshal’s office aforesaid. Of whom Fuller, in
Gloucestershire, gives us this further account of him: that
afterwards, in the reign of Queen Mary, being detected, with several
others, of a design to rob her exchequer, though he made his escape
and fled into his own country, yet there he was apprehended and taken
into custody by a messenger, who was bringing him up to London in
order to have justice done upon him for his crime, but he being
conscious of his guilt, and despairing of pardon, so effectually
poisoned himself that he died on the way, without having the due
reward of his desert.

After the death of Humphrey Arundell, Governor of St. Michael’s Mount,
executed for treason as aforesaid, King Edward VI. sold or gave the
government and revenues thereof to Job Militon, Esq. aforesaid, then
Sheriff of Cornwall, during his life; but his son dying without issue
male, the government, by what title I know not, devolved upon the
Bassets of Tihidy, from some of whom, as I am informed, it came by
purchase to Sir John St. Aubyn, Bart. now in possession thereof.

In the month of July, 1676, at St. Michael’s Mount, about four of the
clock in the afternoon, came from the British ocean, or sea, a ball of
fire, seen by the inhabitants and fishermen at sea, which struck
against the south moorstone wall of this Mount’s church or chapel;
where, meeting resistance from the wall, it glanced through the stones
thereof with some rebounds, making a path, or strake, through the
same, in some places about four inches broad and two inches deep, from
one end of the long side wall almost to the other; and from thence, by
another rebound, it struck the strong oak durns of the dwelling-house
entry, and broke the same in two or three pieces, and so flew into the
hall, where it fell to the ground, having spent its force and strength
as aforesaid, and then brake asunder in pieces, by the side of Mrs.
Catherine St. Aubyn, without doing her any manner of hurt, leaving a
sulphurous smoke behind it in the room; which ball of fire then
appeared to consist of a black-blue metally matter, congealed or
melted by fire like as coal and cinders may be, as Sir John St. Aubyn,
the elder, and other spectators told me.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not any thing in addition to Mr. Hals, except an
uninteresting dissertation to prove that St. Michael’s Mount is not
the Ocrinum of Ptolemy.


WHITAKER.

Mr. Whitaker has given several notes and comments on the narrative of
Mr. Hals, which will here be placed, together with references to the
passages to which they relate.

P. 170. (_a_) The name is Mara-zion, or zien, on the sea, I believe,
and Market-Jew is merely a similar appellation in English. A Jew, in
Cornish language, is Ethow, and Edheuon, Ethchan, are Jews.

P. 170. (_b_) This corrects Mr. Willis, in ii. 3, who there says of
the Market-Jew, and other towns expressly, “none of them ever sent
Members to Parliament, or were ever summoned so to do.” Yet it
coincides exactly with what Dr. Brady remarks in his very valuable
treatise on Boroughs, p. 57, 59, and adds one more to his few returns,
and instances of very many more which might have been produced “if
needful,” p. 59.

P. 172. (_c_) Sel, sil, or sul is merely a view, or prospect, from the
Welsh sylly, to look or behold, and the Armorick sell, a look or
sight; and din-sil, or din-sul, means only the hill of prospect.

(_d_) The real name of St. Michael’s Mount in Cornish is this, Carreg
luz en kuz, a hoary rock in a wood. Borlase’s Scilly Isles, p. 94.

P. 178. (_e_) This notice, unobserved by the noticer himself, lets us
into a part of the history of this Mount, which has never been
unfolded yet. There was plainly a nunnery here, as well as a
monastery. Accordingly we find before what this circumstance alone
explains, that there were two chapels upon the Mount. One is described
before as “a little chapel yet standing, and dedicated to the
Archangel St. Michael, part whereof is now converted to a
dwelling-house.” The other is thus, as “that which renders this place
most famous, the present church or chapel, yet extant, and kept in
good repair with pews; upon the tower of this church or chapel, for it
is bigger than many other Cornish parish churches, is that celebrated
place called Kader-Migell, i. e. Michael’s chair.” So distinct are
these chapels! The monastery I apprehend to have been, “where, towards
the north-west, is a kind of level plain about four or six landyards,”
with “a downright precipice of rocks towards the sea, at least twenty
fathoms high.” And where, about the greater chapel, are “cells cut in
the rocks for hermitical monks of the aforesaid order.” And the
nunnery I suppose to have been where, “from this little square, or
plain, there is an artificial kind of ascent going towards the east,
which offers you a full sight of the outer walls of the castle, and
brings you to Porth Horne (Hourn), part of which is yet to be seen.”

Thus do we get a glimpse of a nunnery that is invisible from every
other point. Tanner, that witness for all other authors upon monastic
notices, gives us no intimation from any of them concerning this
nunnery. Yet Leland confirms what I have observed in Mr. Hals before,
the existence of two churches, or chapels, upon the summit of the
Mount. “The way to the church,” he says, concerning the ascent to the
top, “entereth at the north side from half ebb to half flood, to the
foot of the Mount, and so ascendeth by steps and grices westward, and
thence returneth eastward to the utterward of the church,” or Mount.
Within the said ward is a court strongly walled, “wherein on the south
side is the Chapel of St. Michael, and in the east side a chapel of
our Lady. The Captain and priest’s lodgings be in the south side of
St. Michael’s Chapel.” (Itin. VII. 118.) When this Captain was fixed
there with a garrison, as we shall soon see when he was, the nuns were
obliged to relinquish their cells to him and them. For this reason we
have not a hint in all the ages afterwards of a nunnery here. Only the
chapel was continued for the use of the garrison, while the church
itself was still left to the monks. Such an union as this, of a
monastery and a nunnery upon the summit of a pyramidal hill, and amid
the sequestrations of solitude, carries a strange appearance with it
to our Protestant suspiciousness; yet it was not very uncommon in the
reign of popery. It seems to have been peculiarly calculated for that
purpose for which both monastery and nunnery were generally
calculated, to shew the triumph of faith over the impulses of sense,
and to shew that triumph more conspicuously, by the association of
monks and nuns in monastic vicinity to each other. “This little
fortress,” as Mr. Hals has told us before, “comprehendeth sufficient
rooms and lodgings for the Captain, or Governor, and his soldiers to
reside in,” which I have supposed above “to have been the original
habitations of the nuns and their Abbess; to which adjoining are
several other houses, or cells, heretofore pertaining to the monks
that dwell here, all admirable for their strength, buildings, and
contrivance,” and all probably therefore contemporary or nearly so.

P. 180. (_f_) This account of St. Michael’s Mount is in a strain of
intelligence and judiciousness much superior to the general tenor of
Mr. Hals’s writings. To it I wish to add some useful notices, in
accompaniment of some that I have given before.

Upon the very crown and summit of this pyramidal hill, stands proudly
eminent the church, stretching from east to west, and having a tower
in the middle. It was built by Edward the Confessor, who was the first
to consecrate the Mount to religion, and erected the church on the
little plain at the top of it. Having done this, and erected
habitations for the clergy attending it, he gave them, by charter
still existing in recital, the whole of the Mount, and many lands
beside. “Ego Edwardus, Dei gracia Anglorum Rex, dare volans pretium
redemptionis animæ meæ vel parentum meorum, sub consensu et testimonio
bonorum virorum, tradidi Sancto Michaeli Archangelo, in usum fratrum
Deo servientium in eodem loco, Sanctum Michaelem,” the church, “qui
est juxta mare.” He also gives them “totam terram de Venefire;” and
proceeds “portum addere qui vocatur Ruminella.” Romney, in Kent. Then
came Robert Earl of Mortaigne, the falsely reputed founder, merely to
associate this church with another of the same appellation in
Normandy, and to enlarge its endowments. In a new charter, equally as
the old without a date, he, “habens in bello Sancti Michaelis
vexillum,” says, “do et concedo Montem Sancti Michaelis de Cornubiâ
Deo et monachis ecclesiæ Sancti Michaelis de Periculo Maris
servientibus, cum dimidiâ terræ hidâ.” But, as he adds, “postea autem
ut certissime comperi, Beati Michaelis meritis monachorumque
suffragiis michi a Deo ex propriâ conjuge mea filio concesso, auxi
donum ipsi beato militiæ celestis principi, dedi et dono in Amaneth
(Quere, where?) tres acras terræ, Travalaboth videlicet, Lismanoch,
Trequaners, Carmailoc,” &c. 2. And, finally, comes the Bishop of
Exeter, in a charter dated expressly 1085, to free “ecclesiam Beati
Michaelis Archangeli de Cornubiâ,” from all episcopal jurisdiction. 3.
Thus erected and thus privileged, the church remained till the day of
William of Worcester, and he thus notes the dimensions of it:
“Memorandum, longitudo ecclesiæ Montis Sancti Michaelis continet 30
steppys, latitudo continet 12 steppys.” 4. Carew also speaks of it as
“a chapel for devotion, builded by William Earl of Morton,” (Carew so
speaking with the multitude, when he ought to have given the building
to the Confessor,) “and greatly haunted while folk endured (endeared)
their merits by farre travailing.” 5. Carew thus refers obscurely,
perhaps unconsciously, to a particular privilege annexed to the
church, which was given by one decree from Pope Gregory, and confirmed
by another from Bishop Leofric. “Universis Sanctæ Matris ecclesiæ
presentes literas inspecturis vel audituris salutem,” cries the
former, “noverit universitas vestra quod sanctissimus Papa Gregorius,
anno ab incarnatione Domini millesimo septuagesimo,” the very year,
therefore, in which Earl Montaign gave this church to the other in
Normandy, “ad ecclesiam Montis Sancti Michaelis, in comitatu Cornubiæ,
gerens eximiæ devocionis affectum, piè concessit ecclesiæ predictæ,
[et] omnibus fidelibus, qui illam cum suis beneficiis et elemosinis,”
(with alms and oblations, so that “folke endeared their merits,” not
merely “by farre travailing,” but by a tax upon their purse,)
“exepecierint seu visitaverint, tertiam partem penetenciarum suarum
eis condonari,” a third of all those acts being remitted, which
penitents were enjoined to perform, in order to prove the sincerity of
their penitence to God, and to themselves. The same privilege is
repeated by the Bishop of Exeter in 1085, thus: “omnibus illis, qui
illum ecclesiam suis cum beneficiis et elemosinis expetierint et
visitaverint, tertiam partem penitentiarum condonamus.” Yet, what is
surprising, the privilege became nearly as much unknown afterwards as
it is at present, and was therefore promulgated by the clergy of the
church at the beginning of the fifteenth century: “Tota verba,” adds
the reciter, “in antiquis registris de novo,” a little before
William’s visit, “in hâc ecclesiâ repertis, inventa,” being then
unknown to the very clergy themselves, and only discovered by the
discovery of some registers equally unknown, “prout his in valvis
ecclesiæ publicè ponuntur,” were exhibited to public view by being
posted upon the folding-doors of the church. “Et quia pluribus istud
est incognitum, ideo nos, in Christo Dei famuli et ministri hujus
ecclesiæ, universitatem vestram qui regimen animarum possidetis,” all
the rectors and vicars of the kingdom, “ob mutuæ vicissitudinis
obtentum requirimus et rogamus, quatenus ista publicetis in ecclesiis
vestris, ut vestri subditi et subjecti ad majorem exoracionem
devocionis attentius animentur, et locum istum gloriosius peregrinando
frequentent ad dona et indulgencias predicta graciosè consequenda.”
From this republication of the privilege, undoubtedly, did the
numerous resort of pilgrims to the church begin. Then too was formed
assuredly that seat on the tower, which is so ridiculously described
by Carew, as “a little without the castle――a bad seat in a craggy
place――somewhat dangerous for access;” when it is only a chair,
composed of stones, projecting from the two sides of the tower
battlements, and uniting into a seat without the south-western angle,
but elevated above the battlements on each side. It thus appears
somewhat dangerous from the elevation or projection only, is an
evident addition to the tower, and was assuredly made at this period
for the pilgrims, that they might complete their devotions at the
Mount by sitting in this St. Michael’s Chair, as denominated, and by
showing themselves as pilgrims to the country round. Hence, in an
author[6] who alludes to customs without feeling the force of his
allusion, we read this intimation:

  Who knowes not Michael’s Mount and Chaire,
    The pilgrim’s holy vaunt?

We thus find a reason for the construction of such a chair, that
comports with all the purposes of the church on the tower of which it
is constructed, and that shows it ministered equally with this to the
uses of religion then predominant; making it not, as Carew most
extravagantly makes it, “somewhat dangerous for access, and therefore
holy for the adventure,” but holy in itself, as on the church-tower,
holy in its purposes, as the seat of the pilgrims, and doubly holy as
the seat of accomplishment to all their vows, as the seat of
invitation to all the country. And the whole church remains to this
day, beaten by the rains and buffeted by the winds, yet a venerable
monument of Saxon architecture.

This Mount appears decisively, from the charter of the Confessor, to
have been in his time not surrounded with the sea during all the flood
tide, and not accessible by land only during some hours of the
ebb-tide, as it is at present. It was then not surrounded at all. It
was only near the sea then. Thus the Confessor describes it expressly,
as “Sanctum Michaelem qui est juxta mare.” But as Worcestre adds, with
a range back into the past that is very striking, yet is in general
confirmed by the charter above, “the space of ground upon Mount St.
Michael is two hundred cubits, surrounded with the ocean,” at flood
tide; “the place aforesaid was originally inclosed with a very thick
wood, distant from the ocean six miles, affording the finest shelter
for wild beasts.”


THE EDITOR.

Nothing is known with any certainty respecting the ancient state of
St. Michael’s Mount.

It may have been the seat of a Celtic superstition somewhat similar to
that imagined and described by Dr. William Borlase. Sir Christopher
Hawkins has adduced many arguments for proving this semi-island to
have been the Ictis of Diodorus Siculus; and its situation, united to
its sea-port, may well have recommended such a place for a factory to
the merchants of any civilized nation engaged in commercial
transactions with people so rude as were the Britons of those remote
times. The universal practice in our days, is to establish fortified
stations under similar circumstances, since neither person or property
can be effectually protected in any other way.

The earliest definite tradition of a Christian establishment dates
with the pilgrimage of St. Kenna, in consequence of the appearance of
the Arch-angel at that place. No particular circumstances are ever
related of this extraordinary vision, neither as to the occasion nor
as to the persons so eminently favoured as to behold the celestial
glory, nor as to the time, nor of the exact spot, since it could not
have taken place on the top of the tower, that building having been
constructed in honour of the vision itself.

It may be remarked that lofty and elevated situations throughout
Europe are dedicated to St. Michael, probably on account of the
Archangel being uniformly painted with wings, and therefore tacitly
imagined to have habits similar to birds; and perhaps the dedication
of the largest of our domestic fowls to the celebration of his
festival, may owe its origin to a similar analogy.

Saint Kenna is believed to have imparted the same identical virtue to
the chair which overhangs the tower, as she bestowed on the celebrated
well near Liskeard, and since no one obtains a seat in this chair
without much resolution and steadiness of head, one may be inclined to
anticipate the supposed effect with greater certainty from the
achievement of sitting in St. Michael’s chair, than from drinking
water from St. Kenna’s well. The time of St. Kenna’s visitation is not
accurately known. She is supposed to be the same St. Keyna, daughter
of a prince of Brecknockshire, who lived a recluse life for many years
near a town situated midway between Bristol and Bath, since called
Cainsbarn, after her name, where she founded a monastery in the
beginning of the sixth century, and cleaned the neighbourhood from
snakes and vipers by converting them all into Cornua Ammonis, which
have abounded there ever since, in testimony of her sanctity and of
the fervour of her prayers.

The supposed ancient site of St. Michael’s Mount, its being the hoary
monk in a wood surrounded by forests, is deduced from arguments very
similar to those which prove the miraculous power of St. Kenna in
converting serpents into stones.

Trees have been found buried under the sand and silt in the Mount’s
Bay, as they are frequently found in every similar inlet of the sea on
the southern coast of England. And the tradition, if a term so
respectable may be applied to such vague conjectures, applies equally
to Mount St. Michael; or they may have been derived from a common
origin. See Le Grand Dictionaire Historique, par M. Moreri, Paris
edition of 1188, with the Supplement of 1735. In the 5th folio volume
of the Dictionary, p. 193, and in the 2d folio volume of the
Supplement, p. 261, will be found these passages:

     “Saint Michel ou Mont Saint Michel, en Latin Mons Sancti
     Michaelis in periculo Maris. Bourg de France en Normandie, avec
     une Abbaie celebre et un chateau. Sa situation est assez
     particuliere, sur un rocher qui s’etend au milieu d’une grand
     greve, que la mer couvre de son reflux. On dit qu’ Augustin,
     evêque d’Avranches, qui vivait au commencement du huitieme
     siecle, y suit des chanoines apres une apparition de l’Archange
     Seint Michel.

     “Ce mont s’appelloit le Mont de Tombe à cause de sa figure. On
     pretend qu’une foret occupoit autrefois sont le terrain depuis le
     mont jusques aux Paroisses de Tanis et d’Ardevon; que la mer a
     detruit cette foret, et qu’elle en a pris la place; et c’est de
     la, dit on, que le Mont Saint Michel est surnomme, ‘Au peril de
     la mer,’ Mons in periculo Maris.”

The first authentic document relative to St. Michael’s Mount is the
charter of Saint Edward the Confessor, the original of which remained
among the archives of Mount St. Michael.

In the recent edition of Dugdale’s Monasticon Anglicanum, vol. vii. p.
988:

Priory of St. Michael’s Mount, in Cornwall.――A priory of Benedictine
monks was placed here by King Edward the Confessor. Before A.D. 1085,
however, it was annexed by Robert Earl of Moreton and Cornwall, to the
Abbey of St. Michael in Periculo Maris, in Normandy.

The following entry relating to the property of St. Michael’s Priory,
in Cornwall, occurs in the Domesday Survey:

     “Terra Sancti Michaelis.――Ecclesia S. Michaelis tenet Treiwal,
     Brismar tenebat tempore regis Edwardi. Ibi sunt ii hidæ quæ
     numquam geldaverunt. Terra est viii car. Ibi est i. car. cum uno
     villano, et ii. bord. et x. acr. pasturæ. Val. xx. solid. De hiis
     ii. hid. abstulit Comes Moriton i. hidam. Val. xx. sol.”

In Hampshire, Domesday, tom. i. fol. 43, there is another
entry concerning St. Michael’s Priory:

     In Basingstoches Hund.――Ecclesia S. Michaelis de Monte tenet de
     lege unam ecclesiam cum i. hida et decima M. de Basingestoches.
     Ibi est presbyter et ii. villani et iiii. bord. cum i. car. et
     molin. de xx. sol. et ii. acr. prati. Tot. val. iiii. lib. et v.
     sol.

Oliver, in his Historic Collections relating to the monasteries of
Devon, p. 147, gives the following list of Priors of St. Michael’s
Mount:――

  Ralph de Carteret, admitted Dec. 21, 1260.
  Richard Perer,              April 11, 1275.
  Geoffrey de Gernon,         July 8, 1283.
  Peter de Cara Villa,        Sept. 12, 1316.
  John Hardy,                 Oct. 3, 1349.
  John de Volant,             April 24, 1362.
  Richard Auncell,            Dec. 7, 1385.
  William Lambert,            Oct. 1, 1410.

As the alien priories were suppressed by Henry V. who began his reign
in 1413, William Lambert was probably the last Prior.

Bishop Tanner says, in his Notitia Monastica:――After the suppression
of the alien priories, this was first given by King Henry VI. to
King’s College, Cambridge, and afterwards by King Edward IV. to the
nunnery of Sion, in Middlesex. At the first seizure by King Edward
III. the farm was rated but at 10_l._ per annum, but at the general
dissolution by Henry VIII. the lands belonging to this house, as
parcel of Sion Abbey, were valued at 110_l._ 12_s._ per annum.

The charter of Saint Edward may be thus translated:

     “In the name of the holy and indivisible Trinity. I Edward, by
     the grace of God King of the English, willing to give the price
     of the redemption of my own soul, or of the souls of my parents,
     with the consent and attestation of good men, have delivered to
     St. Michael the Archangel, for the use of the brethren serving
     God in that place, Saint Michael, which is near the sea, with all
     its appendages, that is to say, with its towns, castles, lands,
     and other appurtenances. I have added, moreover, all the land of
     Vennefire, with its towns, villages, fields, meadows, and
     grounds, cultivated or uncultivated, with their proceeds. And I
     have joined, as an addition to the things already given, the
     harbour called Ruminella, with all things belonging to it, that
     is, with mills and establishments for fisheries and with their
     proceeds.

     “But if any one shall endeavour to interpose subtile impediments
     against these gifts, let him be made an anathema, and incur the
     perpetual anger of God.

     “And that the authority of our donation may be held the more
     truly and firmly hereafter, I have, in confirming it,
     underwritten with my own hand, which many also of the witnesses
     have done.

       Signum Regis Edwardi ✠
              Roberti Archiepiscopi Rothomagensis ✠
              Herberti Episcopi Lexoviensis ✠
              Roberti Episcopi Constantiensis ✠
              Radulphi ✠
              Vinfredi ✠ Nigelli Vicecomitis.
              Anschitelli Choschet. Turstini.

The next charter:

     “In the name of the holy and indivisible Trinity, I Robert, by
     the grace of God Earl of Moriton, influenced with the fire of
     divine love, supporting in battle the standard of St. Michael, do
     make known to all the sons of our holy mother church, that for
     the salvation of the souls of myself and of my wife, also for the
     salvation, the prosperity, and safety of the most glorious King
     William, and for obtaining the reward of eternal life, do give
     and grant Mount Saint Michael, of Cornwall, to God and to the
     monks serving (God) of the church of Saint Michael in danger of
     the sea; with half a hide of land, so unbound, and peaceable and
     free from all customs, complaints, and suits, as I hold them. And
     I appoint, the King my Lord consenting, that they may hold a
     market on every Friday. Lastly, as I have most certainly
     ascertained that a son has been given me from God by my wife,
     through the merits of the blessed Michael, by the prayers of the
     monks, I have increased the gift to him the blessed chief of the
     heavenly host. I have given and do give in Amaneth three acres of
     land; that is to say, Trevelaboth, Lismanoch, Trequaners,
     Carmailoc, my most pious Lord King William assenting, together
     with the Queen Mathilde, and their noble sons the Earl Robert,
     William Rufus, and Henry yet a boy, to be quiet and free from all
     pleas, complaints, and forfeits, so that the monks shall not
     answer in any matter to the King’s justice, homicide alone
     excepted.

     “And I Robert Earl of Moriton have made this donation, which
     William the glorious King of the English, and the Queen, and
     their children, have permitted and testified.

       Signum Willielmi Regis ✠    Reginæ Mathildis ✠
              Roberti Comitis ✠    Willielmi Rufi filii Regis ✠
              Henrici Pueri ✠      Roberti Comitis Moritoni ✠
              Matildis Comitissæ ✠ Willielmi filii eorum ✠

     This charter is ratified and confirmed in the year one thousand
     and eighty-five from the Incarnation of our Lord.
                               Signum Liurici Essecestriæ Episcopi ✠”

Among several other charters there is one from Richard King of the
Romans, granting to the Prior three annual fairs, to be holden near
their Grange, now the Long Barn.

     “Richard by the grace of God King of the Romans, and always
     Augustus, to the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and to
     all holding free tenures, and to others his lieges in the county
     of Cornwall, health, and every good. May you all know that we, by
     this our present confirmation, have granted and confirmed to the
     Prior of the blessed Michael, in Cornwall, and to his successors,
     that they may have and hold, and for ever possess, the three
     fairs and three markets on their own proper ground in Marchadyon,
     near their Barn; which three fairs and three markets they have
     hitherto held by the concession of our predecessors Kings of
     England, in Marghasbigan, on ground belonging to others; that is
     to say, on the middle day in Lent, and on the following day; and
     on the eve of the blessed Michael, and on the following day; and
     on the eve of the blessed Michael in monte tumbæ, and on the
     following day, provided that these fairs and markets may not
     cause any damage or injury to other fairs or markets, in
     conformity with the laws and customs of this kingdom of England.

     “In witness of all which things we have thought fit to certify
     this present confirmation with our royal seal.”

There is also a bull of Pope Adrian, in the year 1155, confirming all
their possessions to the Abbat and monks of Mount St. Michael, and
among them Saint Michael’s Mount, in Cornwall; which, previously to
its subjugation, had been exempted from all episcopal interference by
Liuricus Bishop of Exeter, as he states by the exhortation and command
of his Lord, Pope Gregory, and in compliance with the wishes of the
King, of the Queen, and of all the magnates in the realm. And he also
grants a release from a third part of their penances to all such
persons as may visit this church of St. Michael with oblations and
alms.

The Mount appears never to have received a religious society after its
suppression as an alien priory in the reign of King Henry the Fifth.
At the period of the general dissolution it must have been let at an
annual rent, for in the abstract roll preserved in the Augmentation
Office this entry occurs under Syon Abbey: “Cornub.――S. Michael. ad
Montem, Firma 26_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._”

The history of St. Michael’s Mount since its dissolution, as a parcel
of Sion Abbey, is very far from being clear. It appears to have been
granted at first for terms of years to different gentlemen of the
neighbourhood. To Millington, supposed of Pengersick, in Breage; to
Harris, of Kenegie, in Gulval; and perhaps jointly with Millington to
a Billett or Bennett. A person of that name, half-deranged, who died
about the middle of the last century, continued during the whole of
his life to shoot rabbits on the Mount one day in the year by way of
maintaining a supposed right, which, being utterly groundless, was
humanely allowed to pass unobserved.

Queen Elizabeth, or King James I. appears to have granted the whole in
fee to Robert Cecil, created Earl of Salisbury May 4, 1605. But the
Mount was seised into his own hands by King Charles I. just at the
breaking out of the civil war, probably on account of the great
military importance of this hold, when William Cecil, son of the
former, having subscribed the Declaration made at York, on the 13th of
June, 1642, left the party of which the King was at the head, and
joined the opposite party in London.

An order was soon after given to Sir Francis Basset, then Sheriff of
Cornwall, to place the Mount in a state of defence, and to supply it
with ammunition and provisions; and it is not improbable that a grant
was made of the castle and Mount to Sir Francis Basset at once, in
witness of his zeal displayed in the cause, and as some indemnity for
the expenses he had incurred, the royalist party never having had any
considerable sum of money at their command.

The Bassets having suffered extremely in their property by efforts
made during the war, and by compositions afterwards, it was found
convenient to sell St. Michael’s Mount about the year 1660; when it
was most fortunately purchased by Sir John St. Aubyn, in whose opulent
family, and through five John St. Aubyns, it has descended to the
present possessor of that name.

Every individual of this family has proved himself desirous of
supporting, of maintaining, and of beautifying one of the most
extrordinary spots in the whole world.

Including Dartmoor and the Scilly Islands, granite breaks out into six
large but unequal masses, which, like the Appeninnes of Italy, extend
a narrow promontory into the sea. St. Michael’s Mount presents a ridge
of granite equally distinct with any of these great masses, and rises
into a lofty cone, the base being surrounded by the killas, a peculiar
schist, the chief metalliferous rock of Cornwall.

And here most of the curious phenomena are found which occur at the
junction of these two rocks.

The buildings on the summit are grand and appropriate to the scenery,
and venerable from their antiquity. The church, with its tower,
completing the pyramidal figure of the whole, are supposed to date so
far back as the reign of St. Edward. And a modern addition of two
rooms on the eastern part of the building, made by the late Sir John
Aubyn about the year 1750, is in complete harmony with the other
parts, and adds to the general effect.

The inside of the castle, or priory, has been much decorated within a
few years, and florid gothic ornaments have been added to the
exterior; but opinions are much divided as to the accordance of these
new parts with buildings to which Sir Walter Scott’s line may be
applied,

  In Saxon strength the Abbey frown’d.

At the foot of the Mount a small pier existed from a time probably
anterior to the Monastery itself, but in the early part of the last
century a lease on lives was granted to Mr. George Blewett, the early
associate and in some degree rival of the great Mr. Lemon. This
gentleman rebuilt the pier on a very enlarged scale, and concentrated
here almost the whole commerce of Penwith hundred, which has since his
time gone to Penzance and Hayle.

St. Michael’s Mount is said to be selected as the scene of many
strange adventures, in Italian romances; while Cornwall is supposed to
abound with enchanters, goblins, and other supernatural beings.

An English romance, once popular with the old and with the young, but
now banished even from our nurseries, begins thus:

“In the days of King Arthur the Mount of Cornwall was kept by a
monstrous giant.” ma

       Tasca Argo i Mini, e tascia Artu qui’ suoi
       Erronti, che di sogni empion le carte.

Marazion has certainly to boast of very great antiquity. It may have
existed in the earliest times, if the Mount really afforded protection
to the Eastern merchants, who sought the shores of Cornwall for its
tin.

And the names Marazion and Marketjew cannot but excite an inclination
to believe that in the Middle Ages this place may have been the resort
of the most extraordinary people, who at all times have manifested a
peculiar inclination for dealing in metals; it is moreover worthy of
remark that all remains of places where tin has heretofore been
smelted in the most simple manner, are invariably denominated Jew’s
Houses. Marazion must also have afforded shelter and entertainment to
the crowds of pilgrims assembling at particular periods to adore the
Shrine of St. Michael, and to participate in the indulgence granted by
Liuricus Bishop of Exeter, on the exhortation of his Lord the Pope.

Marazion received a charter of incorporation from Queen Elizabeth, but
the town, although beautifully situated, has not kept pace in the
career of improvement with many others, and especially not with
Penzance.

About the middle of the last century, which was the great epoch for
the establishment of turnpike roads, as the beginning of this century
will be considered for their improvement on principles of science and
of general accommodation, a turnpike road was laid out from Falmouth,
through Penryn and Helston, to the western of Marazion, by which a new
entrance was opened from Penzance; and about the year 1775 a large
castellated house was built at the western extremity of the town, by
Mr. John Blewett, son of Mr. George Blewett, the very considerable
merchant noticed above, in imitation of the house at Tregenna, near
St. Ive’s, built by Mr. Samuel Stephens a few years before, under the
direction of Mr. Wood, an architect from Bath, who had constructed
most of the splendid works in that city.

Mr. George Blewett, rising from the lowest origin, is said to have
accumulated a hundred thousand pounds. On the death of his only son
the property went to a nephew, and the whole has been dissipated.

The house was some time afterwards purchased by another Mr. Blewett,
wholly unconnected with the former, who acquired a considerable
fortune in the war: that has also entirely disappeared, and the house
has passed into other hands.

Mr. Pascoe Grenfell, Commissary to the States of Holland, resided here
during a long life, although he was originally of Penzance; and here
was born his son Mr. Pascoe Grenfell, junior, well known throughout
England as an active Member of Parliament, as a man of talent and of
great liberality, commensurate to his almost unexampled success in
commerce.

From Marazion also have sprung the family of Cole.

Captain Francis Cole would have risen to the most elevated station in
the Navy if he had not been cut off by an early death.

Captain Christopher Cole most justly acquired the highest military
reputation by his capture of Banda in the East Indies, with a force
several times less numerous than the garrison which he overcame; and,
having taken the place with such an union of courage, determined
resolution, and of prudence, as would rival the exploits of chivalry,
he acquired still greater glory by extending a truly heroic courtesy
to the vanquished, protecting them in their persons, in their
properties, and in the exercise of their religious and of their civil
rights. Having settled, in consequence of his marriage, in
Glamorganshire, he has had the honour of representing that county in
Parliament.

The Reverend John Cole, D.D. attained the high situation of Rector of
Exeter College, Oxford.

And the younger brother, Dr. Samuel Cole, is now Chaplain-general to
the Navy.

The principal inhabitant at present is Mr. William Cornish, a very
respectable merchant and a magistrate for the county; he married a
daughter of the elder Captain Cole, and has a numerous family.

Treveneage seems to have been the principal seat in this parish. A
branch of the Godolphins resided here, having acquired the property by
a marriage with the heiress of an ancient family denominated Goverigon
or Gavrigan, whose principal residence was in St. Colomb.

Katherine Godolphin, daughter and heiress of Francis Godolphin, Esq.
of Treveneage, married John St. Aubyn, of Clowance, Esq. and was
buried at St. Hilary, on the 13th of March 1662, as appears from an
inscription on a monument to her memory in the church.

The barton of Treveneage was however sold, and after passing through
Robinson, it was purchased, about the year 1665, by the family of
Tredenham, of Tredenham, or Tredinham, in Probus.

Mr. Joseph Tredinham was Sheriff of Cornwall in 1665, and was
knighted. One of his daughters, and eventually his coheiress, married
Scobell of Menigwins, in St. Austell; and from a coheiress of Scobell
this barton, together with an extensive manor, descended to the
Hawkins’s of Pennance, and from them to the late Sir Christopher
Hawkins, of Trewithan in Probus, and of Trewinnard in St. Erth.

Tregembo, or Tregember, bears an appearance of considerable antiquity.
Mr. Lysons says that it belonged to the family of Grosse, and that it
passed by sales, through King to Penneck, in the year 1684.

The Pennecks were originally of Trescow in Breage, and advanced
themselves in the world by the stewardship and patronage of the
Godolphins. One of this family, the Reverend John Penneck, who died in
1724, was Chancellor of Exeter, and would probably have been advanced
much higher in the church if the Marlborough and Godolphin
administration had remained longer in the possession of power.

On this gentleman’s decease, without children, his property devolved
on the Reverend John Penneck, vicar of Gulval, who married ――――
Wroughton, and left two sons and two daughters; John, who succeeded
him in the living of Gulval, and Charles, bred to the law, but who
quitted that profession for the militia during the American War.

Mr. John Penneck died in 1789, and his brother in 1801; they were
succeeded by their two sisters, who were, Catherine, married to the
Reverend William Borlase, son and eventually sole heir of the Reverend
Walter Borlase, LL.D. of Castlehorneck; and Ann, married to John
Bingham Borlase, M.D. who had the honour of bestowing his early
medical education on Sir Humphrey Davy. Each of these sisters left an
only daughter. Ann, daughter of the eldest, married to the Reverend
Mr. Peters; and Ann, daughter of the second, married to Captain
Pascoe.

The manor of Tregurtha also belonged to the Pennecks, having been
purchased in the early part of the last century; but this manor,
together with a large portion of their other possessions, were sold by
the two last brothers. This manor was bought jointly by Mr. Carne, of
Penzance, and the late Mr. Thomas Grylls, of Helston. Tregembo still
belongs to the two ladies.

Ennis, usually called Ninnis, was for some time a gentleman’s seat,
although it is now become a mere farm. Mr. Humphrey Millett, the last
resident gentleman, had been a member of Exeter College. He married
Mary, daughter of Mr. Sandys, of Helston, and dying early in life left
two daughters his coheiresses. The eldest daughter, Mary, married
Thomas Grylls, Esq. and the second daughter, Grace, married Charles
Short, Esq. of Devonshire, Clerk of the Rules in the Court of King’s
Bench, and both have families. The widow married secondly George
Trework, Esq. of Penzance.

Trevarthen has the appearance of a place respectable in former times.
The freehold belongs to the Duke of Leeds, as heir of the Godolphins;
but it was held for a long period of years on a lease for lives by one
of the numerous branches of the family of Davies, now all extinct.

This parish has abounded in mines, especially in the manors of
Treveneage and Tregurtha; but the most remarkable in its consequences
was a mine called Whele Fortune, on Trowall or Truthwell, belonging to
Lord Godolphin, as it enabled Mr. Lemon to move on the great scale
which afterwards so eminently distinguished him; as it laid the
foundation of Mr. Blewett’s large fortune; and brought forward Captain
Dewen, whose fortune descended on two daughters, one married to the
Rev. George Borlase, Fellow of All Souls, and son of the historian;
the other married to Mr. Keir, a gentleman in the profession of
medicine.

The church is situated on a commanding elevation, and would be an
imposing object throughout the whole neighbourhood, if it were not
disfigured by an insignificant spire.

The church and churchyard contain several monuments to the Godolphins,
Pennecks, Milletts, Blewetts, &c.

On a stone, now made the floor of a seat in the south-east corner of
St. Hilary church, is the following curious inscription to one of the
Godolphins.

  Aquila quæ volucres cœli supereminet omnes,
  Et Caper e summis qui carpit montibus herbam,
  Quique tuum referens _Godolphin_ nomen in undis
  Delphinus, piscesque regit, cursuque fatigat;
  Hæc bene te natum proavis insignia monstrant
  Per cœlum, et terras, et vasta per æquora claris,
  Et tua te virtus cunctis majoribus æquat.
        Sic transit Gloria Mundi!
        Et quæ modo candida Nix est,
        Phœbo splendente, liquescit.
        Et quæ modo florida vigent
        Per amœnos Lilia campos,
        Citius quam dicere possis,
        Aspectu Solis eoi
        Marcescunt; sic violentis
        Fatorum legibus omnes
        Cedunt, juvenesque senesque,
        Sic qui modo floruit inter
        Primos, generosus, et inter
        Claros; quos vexit honoris
        Summi ad fastigia virtus;
        Nulli pietate secundus,
        _Godolphin_ morte peremptus,
        Fatis succumbit iniquis.
        Humana hinc discite quàm
        Vita incerta et brevis!
        Sic transit Gloria Mundi!

In connection with the church, one of those casual coincidences may be
noticed, which continued to be remembered and cited for more than a
century in this parish, and to obtain belief or discredit, as an
interposition of Providence, according to the religious or the
political opinions of those who heard or related it.

It seems that a Mr. Palmer held this living previously to the
Restoration of King Charles II. and that he was one among the two
thousand, who in obedience to the dictates of their consciences, from
the fear of disgrace, or from political motives, refused, “In the
church, chapel, or place of public worship belonging to their
benefices or promotions, upon some Lord’s Day before the Feast of St.
Bartholomew, which should be in the year of our Lord God one thousand
six hundred and sixty-two, openly, publickly, and solemnly to read the
morning and evening prayer, appointed to be read by and according to
the Book of Common Prayer, at the times thereby appointed, and after
such reading thereof, and openly and publickly before the congregation
there assembled, to declare their unfeigned assent to the use of all
things in the said book contained and prescribed.” See the Act of
Uniformity, anno decimo tertio et quarto Caroli II. ch. 4.

In consequence of this refusal the two thousand incumbents were
ejected without any provision or allowance whatever, so that many of
them perished from actual want. Several thus ejected without doubt
continued the exercise of their sacred functions among such as were
desirous or willing to assist at them; and for this offence Mr. Palmer
was called before magistrates appointed by the new government, who
ordered his commitment to prison, when the ejected vicar is said to
have addressed Mr. Robinson, of Treveneage, one of the magistrates, in
the words of Micaiah, “If thou return at all in peace, the Lord hath
not spoken by me.”

Within a short time after this vaticination Mr. Robinson met his death
by the goring of his own bull.

It would be inexcusable in me if I were to leave this parish without
noticing the late Vicar, from whose kindness I received information
whenever it was asked, in those sciences which have afforded me
uninterrupted entertainment and delight throughout the whole
continuance of a protracted life.

The Reverend Malachy Hitchins was born in the parish of Gwenap, about
the year 1740; possessed of hereditary claims to mathematical
attainments as the nephew of Mr. Thomas Martyn, well known by his
excellent map of Cornwall published about that time; a map then
equalling if not surpassing the best county maps of England, and still
almost unrivalled for minute and accurate topography, including the
boundaries of parishes――the work of fifteen years labour.

I have not succeeded in acquiring any information respecting Mr.
Hitchins in his early years, with the exception of a general report of
his being then distinguished by the ability, accuracy, and diligence
conspicuous in his future years.

These qualities, and probably his near connection with Mr. Martyn,
recommended Mr. Hitchins as an assistant to Mr. Benjamin Donne in
constructing a map of Devonshire, an occupation decisive of his future
life, for at Bideford he became acquainted with Miss Hockin, whom he
married, and acquiring with her an accession of fortune, he proceeded
to Oxford, and became a member of Exeter College, with the view of
obtaining orders. But Mr. Hitchins possessed talents and acquirements
that could not admit of his remaining undistinguished at a place of
learning. He was soon noticed by the mathematicians, and recommended
to the Reverend Nevil Maskelyne, Astronomer Royal, to assist him at
the Royal Observatory; and when Doctor Maskelyne went to St. Helena,
in the year 1761, to observe the transit of Venus, and to ascertain,
if it were possible, the parallax of Sirius, Mr. Hitchins had the
whole care of the Observatory entrusted to his hands.

Another object of Doctor Maskelyne’s voyage, and one eventually of by
far the greatest importance, was to prove from actual experience that
Longitudes at sea might be derived from observations on the moon.
Tables founded on the theory of gravitation and of inertia, as laid
down by SIR ISAAC NEWTON, had then been constructed by Tobias Mayer,
of Gottingen, and communicated to Dr. Maskelyne in manuscript,
representing the moon’s place at all times in the heavens, within
narrow limits; and the admirable instrument invented by Mr. John
Hadley, by rendering the apparent contact of two objects, independent
of all agitations of the instrument itself, enabled observers to
ascertain the distance of the moon from the sun, or from a star,
almost as accurately on board a ship as on the solid land. With these
assistances the determination of a ship’s longitude became an easy
problem. The moon is converted into the hand of a clock, indicating by
its distance from a particular star, the time at Greenwich Observatory
made the first meridian. This distance is ascertained by Hadley’s
sextant, and after applying certain corrections for parallax and
refraction, the time at Greenwich becomes known. The actual time at
the place of observation is then determined from the altitude of some
celestial body, and thus differences in the longitude required.

Doctor Maskelyne having fully verified the complete practicability of
this method, procured through the Board of Longitude the publication
of Mayer’s tables, accompanied by a reward or premium, under an Act of
Parliament, to his widow, of three thousand pounds; and soon
afterwards the same eminent and patriotic astronomer devised and
executed a work absolutely necessary for enabling ordinary persons to
avail themselves of this important discovery, namely the Nautical
Almanac, in which the sun’s place is accurately given for the noon of
each day, the place of the moon for noon and midnight of each day, and
the true angular distance of the moon from the sun, and from certain
stars for every third hour of the day and of the night throughout the
year, together with the equation of time, the places of the planets,
&c.: thus saving to observers perhaps ninety-nine parts out of a
hundred of the calculations that were previously indispensible.

The labour of such a work must obviously require many hands,
especially as without great care in constructing the original
calculation, and in correcting the press, it would prove worse than
useless. To ensure this accuracy, the most important parts were
performed in duplicate by different persons, and the whole carefully
collated and verified by the superior officer, called the Comparer,
under the ultimate superintendence of the Astronomer Royal himself.

In constructing the first Nautical Almanac that appeared, for 1767,
Mr. Hitchins performed the office of a computer; but for all the
others, up to the period of his decease in 1809, he most
advantageously, not only for this country but for the whole world,
executed the office of comparer.

The Lunar tables are now carried to a degree of perfection far
exceeding those of Mayer, and the Nautical Almanac has been enlarged
and improved; but the glory of devising the work remains with Doctor
Maskelyne, and perhaps scarcely a less degree of glory with Mr.
Hitchins, for having conducted it with unrivalled accuracy for a
period extending through so great a number of years.

During his residence at Greenwich Mr. Hitchins had received holy
orders; and, as the office of comparer did not confine him to any
particular place, he removed to Exeter, and soon obtained the vicarage
of Hennock, to hold for a minor. He did not fail however of attracting
attention from the clergy of the Cathedral, and about the year 1774
Bishop Keppell collated him to St. Hilary, which had lapsed in
consequence of a dispute between two of the numerous patrons claiming
unsettled turns to the presentation. Here Mr. Hitchins resided
respected and admired till the close of his life, on the 28th of March
1809; having been distinguished by the succeeding Bishop of Exeter,
Dr. John Ross, who conferred on him the adjoining vicarage of Gwinear.

Mr. Hitchins had four sons and one daughter.

The eldest, Richard, was a Fellow of Exeter College, and died
unmarried on a college living.

The second, Thomas, also a clergyman, married Miss Emma Grenfell, of
Marazion; he served for many years a church near Plymouth, and has
left several children.

The third, Malachy, inherited his father’s genius with his name. He
filled the office for some time that his father had occupied in the
Royal Observatory; but ultimately preferring the law, he settled at
Marazion, where he died at an early age in December 1802.

The fourth son, Fortescue, was also in the law, and settled at St.
Ive’s. He distinguished himself as a poet and as a writer, having
taken a considerable share in compiling a History of Cornwall; but his
life was also restricted to a narrow space.

The only daughter, Josepha, married William Millett, Esq. originally
of Gurlin in St. Erth, and is now a widow with several sons.

Mr. Hitchins had his time too much occupied to allow of his composing
any considerable work. He made one communication however to the Royal
Society, and another to the Society of Antiquaries; besides these
there are various minor publications, some bearing his name, and
others the signature of Vatum Ultimus, alluding to his which is not
uncommon in Cornwall, is probably derived not immediately from the
Hebrew Prophet, but from St. Malachy, Archbishop of Armagh, who is
said to have died in the arms of St. Bernard in the year 1148.

Mr. Hitchins was succeeded by the Reverend Thomas Pascoe, the present
vicar.

The Parish Feast is celebrated on the Sunday nearest to the 13th of
January, the day of the patron Saint.

St. Hilary measures 3228 statute acres.

And here it is right to state that all the measurements of parishes
were made by Mr. Hitchins, from the boundaries laid down in his
uncle’s map, and that they are copied from a manuscript which he had
the kindness to give me in Oct. 1805.

  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3322    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           676   16    0

  Population, {in 1801,| in 1811,| in 1821,| in 1831,
             {   990  |   1248  |   1558  |   1728
    giving an increase of 74½ per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is similarly constituted to the adjacent parishes of St.
Erth and Gwinear, being all situated on a line running north-east and
south-west, between the large masses of granite of the Land’s End and
of Cambrea.

St. Michael’s Mount, adjoining the shore of this parish, is an object
of great attention to the geologist as well as to the tourist. It is
composed almost entirely of granite, having only two small patches of
slate, one on the western and the other on the eastern side; at these
two places, and more particularly at the latter, the junction of the
granite and of the slate may be seen, the slate being intersected with
numerous granite veins. The granite of the Mount is not so
large-grained as that of the Land’s End; but the structure of the rock
is no where better displayed than at this place on the southern side;
where the whole mass is distinctly divided into large quadrangular
blocks, and is traversed in a direction parallel to the divisions, by
quartz veins, which contain crystals of mica, of apatite, and of
topaz, and also the ores of tin, copper, and wolfram, the latter of
which is the most abundant.

One most important geological fact is here beautifully exhibited. That
the mineral composition of granite is altered in the vicinity of
quartz veins, whether they are metalliferous or otherwise; approaching
these veins the granite becomes more and more siliceous, until at
length it gradually passes into the quartz, which forms the body (or
matrix as it is called) of the veins. A fact difficult to reconcile
with the generally received opinion, which assumes all veins to have
been originally fissures, subsequently filled up from above or beneath.


      [6] William of Worcester.




HILL, NORTH.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon the north Lewanack,
east Lezant, south and west Linkynhorne. Under what district this
parish was taxed in Domesday Roll I know not; however, in the
Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the value
of Cornish Benefices, 1294, “Ecclesia de Northill in decanatu de
Estwellshire” was taxed £6; in Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, £36. 6_s._
8_d._ The patronage is in Darley; the incumbent Darley. The parish is
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, £211. 12_s._

Trebatha, in this parish, which after the English-Cornish may be
interpreted a town of baths, or washing fountains, otherwise the town
of clubs or bats, is the dwelling of an old family of gentlemen
surnamed Spour. The present possessor Henry Spour, Gent. that married
Rhodes, and giveth for his arms, Gules, on a chevron Or, a rose of the
first between two mullets or spur rowells Sable pierced. Now Charles
Grylls, Esq. married the daughter and heir of Spour, relict of Bellot,
of Bochin. She surviving her husband, without issue, as I am informed,
is married to her cousin Rodd, and to him and his heirs hath conveyed
all her lands.

Batt-in, Batt-en, in this parish, from which place was denominated an
old family of gentlemen surnamed Battin, whose only daughter and heir,
in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth’s reign, was married to one Mr.
Vincent, a barrister-at-law, that came down the Western Circuit with
the judges, and so together with herself brought this barton into his
family.

The late possessor, John Vincent, Gent. sometime Fellow of All Souls
College in Oxford, originally descended, as I am informed, from the
Vincents of Stoke Dabernon in Surrey, and giveth the same arms, viz.
Azure, three quatrefoils Argent. His younger brother, Mr. Matthias
Vincent, was bound or bred an apprentice with a merchant at London,
and having but a small fortune to begin trade with, yet for his care
and industry was so taken notice of in London that he was sent by the
East India Company as one of their factors to Surat in the Mogul’s
country, where by his skill in factorage and merchandize, but chiefly
by marriage with a Portugal merchant’s daughter and heir, he obtained
a great quantity of riches, goods, and chattels; whereupon he left his
servile trade of a factor to others, and returned with his family and
riches safely into England, temp. James II. by whom he was knighted,
and in one of his Parliaments was chosen a burgess for the town of
Lestwithell, and served in that capacity for some time, till an
unlucky accident happened between him and his wife, or lady, who upon
some real or feigned grounds grew jealous of his familiarity with
another, privately eloped from him, carrying with her great quantities
of his gold and jewels. He left issue by her two sons, lately living,
though, as I am told, this estate for the most part is spent or
consumed.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not made any addition to the history of this parish.


THE EDITOR.

By far the principal place in this parish is Trebartha, now for three
descents the residence of the very respectable family of Rodd.

Mrs. Grylls bequeathed her property to Mr. Francis Rodd, of
Herefordshire, a Captain in the Guards, not as her relation but as her
intended third husband. This gentleman was succeeded by his son
Francis Rodd, for many years Colonel of the Cornwall Militia. He
married one of the three coheiresses of Heale and Paynten, and left
three sons, Francis Heale Rodd, Esq. the present possessor of
Trebartha; the Rev. Edward Rodd, D.D. and Rector of St. Just in
Roseland, heretofore Fellow of Exeter College, and Proctor of the
University of Oxford in the year 1802; and Sir John Tremayne Rodd, an
Admiral. Also two daughters, Jane and Harriet, the latter married to
Mr. Fursdon, of Devonshire.

Trebartha is in many respects worthy of being reckoned among the first
places in Cornwall. The scenery, grand in other respects, is rendered
still more so by the addition of a mountain torrent; and the house has
been greatly improved by the late proprietor and the present, who has
chiefly resided there, highly respected as a magistrate, as a
gentleman, and as the benefactor of his neighbourhood. Mr. Rodd was a
Fellow of All Souls, and during the war he served, as his father had
done before him, in the defence of his country.

Mr. Lysons says that the Lord of the Manor of Treveniel, which was
passed from the Carews to the Spours, and from them to Rodd, claims by
immemorial custom of the Mayor of Launceston the service of holding
his stirrup whenever he shall mount his horse in that town in presence
of the Duke of Cornwall; a claim, however, difficult to prove by any
exercise of it, even within legal memory, and now rendered obsolete by
disusage if that effect is ever produced.

The presentation to the living is in Mr. Rodd. The church is large,
consisting of three entire ailes with a lofty tower, and placed on a
commanding eminence. The interior is adorned with several splendid
monuments of the present and former families resident at Trebartha.

The present rector is the Rev. E. Trelawny, instituted in 1828.

  North-hill measures 6,815 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5102    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           531    8    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    782  |    803   |    1089  |    1155
    giving an increase of nearly 14¾ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The western half of this parish is situated on granite, and the
eastern half on slate belonging to the porphyritic series. The rocks
of both resemble those of the corresponding parts of Alternum.




HILL, SOUTH.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon the north
Linkynhorne, east Stoke Climsland, south Killaton, west St. Ive. At
the time of the Domesday-tax this parish, I suppose, was rated under
the jurisdiction of Stoke Climsland or Trewollea, or Trewoolea. In the
Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester aforesaid, 1294,
Ecclesia de Sut Hill was rated cxiii_s._ iv_d._; in Wolsey’s
Inquisition £38. The patronage in the King or Duke of Cornwall; the
incumbent Trelawny, Dean of Exeter; and the parish rated to the 4_s._
per pound Land Tax, 1696, 139_l._ 4_s._

Quere, whether Killington Church be not a daughter to or consolidated
into this church?

Mana-ton, in this parish, gave name and origin to an old family of
gentlemen, from thence surnamed de Manaton; the present possessor,
Francis Manaton, Esq. Receiver-general of her Majesty’s Land Tax, that
married Huckmore, and giveth for his arms, Argent, on a bend Sable,
three mullets of the Field.


TONKIN.

It is so called from its situation in respect to North Hill, and its
church lying on a high hill. The patronage in Trelawny. The incumbent
Mr. Hele Trelawny, who succeeded his kinsman Edward Trelawny, Dean of
Exeter.

Manor of Kellyland. This is the chief estate in the parish, it is
called Conylond by Mr. Carew, through mistake, in one place, as he
rightly names it in another, and is there said to be held by the Baron
of Stafford.

The manor of Manaton, which I take to signify Stony Hill, as corrupted
from main, a stone, and doon, a hill, has been ever the seat, perhaps
from before the Conquest, of the family of that name, though the head
of it Francis Manaton, Esq. has lately removed to Kilworthy, near
Tavistock, which fell to him on the death of his kinsman Henry
Manaton, Esq. of that place, and of Harwood in Calstock. Since his
removal the house here, which was ruinous, has been left to fall,
which I should scarce have noticed had I not observed the old arms of
this family painted on glass in the hall there, Sable, a saltire Vairy
between twelve crosses pattee fitchy Or, within a border Argent; which
they have changed for, Argent, a bend Sable charged with three mullets
of the Field, their present bearing.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Whitaker, in a note, suggests Manach Don, or Ton, the Monk’s
House, as the derivation for Manaton.

Mr. Lysons says that two thirds of the great manor of Calliland or
Kalliland, passed from the baronial family of Stafford, by a
coheiress, to Willoughby Lord Brook, and are now vested in Lord
Clinton; the other third was in the Crown, and was granted by King
Richard the Third to John Coryton, Esq. of Newton; that it belonged in
1620 to the Glanvilles, and is now vested in Richard Strode, Esq. and
that Manaton is become the property of Sir William Call. Lord Clinton
is patron of the rectory; which was called St. Sampson’s de Southill,
in honour no doubt of St. Sampson already mentioned, a native of
Monmouthshire, and afterwards a Bishop in France.

The church is large, and placed on an elevated situation, and contains
memorials of the Manaton family.

The Rev. John Trefusis, instituted in 1802, is the present rector.

  Southill measures 3089 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2622    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           507   10    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   447   |    466   |    534   |    530
    giving an increase of 18½ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The eastern part of this parish nearly touches the granite of Hingston
Down. Like the adjoining parish of Callington, its rocks are
felspathic; and they are intersected by beds of porphyry, and by
numerous metalliferous veins. The rocks of the other parts of the
parish are rather anomalous, being such as occur between the
porphyritic and the calcareous series.




JACOBSTOW.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Stratton, and hath upon the north
Poundstock, east St. Mary Wick, west St. Gennis, south Otterham.

In the Domesday Tax, 1087, this parish passed under the jurisdiction
of Pen-fon, or Pen-foun. In the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln
and Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia de Jacobstow in decanatu de
Trigmajorshire was valued vi_l._; in Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, and
Valor Beneficiorum 19_l._; the patronage in Elliot; the incumbent
Holden; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696,
113_l._ 14_s._

Pen-fon, now Penfowne aforesaid, i. e. head well, spring of water or
fountain, gave name and original to an old family of gentlemen
surnamed de Penfowne, who have lived here in good fame and reputation
for many generations.


TONKIN.

I take St. Jacob to be the patron Saint of this parish, and not the
patriarch Jacob, as some have imagined.

The termination Stowe comes from the Saxon, and means a home or a
dwelling.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons mentions some few particulars respecting this parish. He
says that Sawacott, or Southcot, is the sole village in the parish;
and that a manor called Penhallam, having belonged to a Sir John
Stowell in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, has passed through various
hands, and that it had been finally purchased about the year 1802 by
the Rev. Charles Dayman.

The barton of Berry Court has its mansion surrounded by a moat,
indicative of ancient importance, but nothing seems to be known of its
history.

In Wood’s Athenæ Oxonienses may be found the following account of a
native of this parish:

Degorie Wheare was born at Jacobstow in Cornwall; retired to the
habitation of the Muses called Broadgate Hall (Pembroke College) in
the beginning of the year 1592, aged 19; took the degrees in Arts,
that of Master being completed in 1600; elected probationer fellow of
Exeter College; and six years afterwards leaving that house, travelled
into several countries beyond the seas, by which he obtained as well
learning as experience.

At his return he was entertained by the Lord Chandois, and by him
respected and exhibited to. After his death our author with his wife
retired to Gloucester Hall, where Doctor Hawley, the Principal,
demised to him lodgings; and there he became so well acquainted with
Mr. Thomas Allen, that by his endeavours the learned Cambden made him
his First Reader of his History Lecture which he founded in the
University.

Soon after he was made Principal of the Hall, the which with his
Lecture he kept to his dying day; and was esteemed by some a learned
and genteel man, and by others a Calvinist.

Having entered at Oxford in the year 1592, aged, as his friend states,
nineteen years, the date of his birth must be 1573; and it appears
from the Fasti of Gloucester Hall, now Worcester College, that he died
in 1647, aged therefore 74. His chief works are,

Prælectiones Hiemales de Ratione et Methodo Legendi Historias Civiles
et Ecclesiasticas; this work has gone through several editions, and
been translated into English.

Oratio Auspicalis ubi Cathedram Historicam primum ascendit.

Parentatio Historica――Commemoratio Vitæ et Martis Gulielmi Camdeni,
cum Imaginis Camdenianæ Dedicatione.

Lord St. German’s (Eliot) is patron of the living, and the present
rector is the Rev. John Glanville, instituted in 1822.

  Jacobstow measures 4,206 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2098    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           270    6    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   432   |    489   |    571   |    638
    giving an increase of 47⅔ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is entirely situated on the Dunstone rocks, mentioned
under the heads of Boyton and St. Gennys. To the cursory observer few
opportunities offer themselves here for studying the nature of the
rocks; but perhaps many quarries or similar excavations may be known
to those who are resident.




ILLOGAN.


HALS.

Is situate in the Hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the north the
Irish sea, west Gwithian, south Camburne, east St. Agnes.

In the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294,
Ecclesia Sancti Illogani was valued to first fruits £8. In Wolsey’s
inquisition 1521, by the same name, £22. 7_s._ 5_d._; the patronage in
Basset, the incumbent Basset; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per
pound Land Tax 1696, by the same name, £191. 16_s._

The lordship of Ty-hiddy, alias Ty-lud-y, in this parish, hath from
the time of Henry the Third, how long before I know not, been the seat
of the ancient and knightly family of the Bassets, whose first
ancestor came out of Normandy with William the Conqueror 1066, and was
posted in those parts a soldier under Robert Earl of Morton and
Cornwall, of whose posterity (an officer or soldier 17th Edward II.)
was William Basset, who was then possessed of £40 _per annum_ in lands
and rents in knight service. Carew’s Surv. Corn. p. 51. William
Basset, of Ty-hyddy, 3 Henry IV. held in that place and Trevalga, one
knight’s fee of Morton, (idem liber); John Bassett was Sheriff of
Cornwall 28 Henry VI. when John Chudleigh was Sheriff of Devon; John
Basset was Sheriff of Cornwall 13 Henry VII. when Peter Edgecomb was
Sheriff of Devon; John Basset, Knight, was Sheriff of Cornwall 13
Henry VIII. when William Courtenay was Sheriff of Devon. The present
possessor, Francis Basset, Esq. that married the relict of Sir William
Gerrard, Knight, and after her decease Pendarves, of Roscrowe family;
his father Lucy, the inheritrix of Heale, of Bradinge; his
grandfather, Sir Francis Basset, Anna, daughter of Sir Jonathan
Trelawney, Knight. Sir Francis Basset’s two younger brothers were bred
soldiers; and in the unhappy wars between King Charles I. and his
Parliament, were, for their valour and good conduct in his service,
knighted, but by the unfortunate end and success of that Prince and
his wars, afterwards lived and died under the pressure of misfortune.

And here I take it worth remembrance that Sir Francis Basset, Knight,
aforesaid, in the beginning of the reign of King Charles II. in the
morning about ten o’clock on Ty-hyddy downs, himself or his falconer
let fly a goshawk or tassell to a heathpolt or heathcock, which they
had there sprung or started on the wing, which birds of game and prey
in a short while flew eastwards, over St. Agnes parish, and quite out
of sight, so that they despaired of ever finding them again; but, the
next day, before twelve o’clock, to their wonder and amazement, a
person sent from the Mayor of Camelford, brought both to Ty-hyddy to
Sir Francis; the hawk well and alive, with his varvells on his legs,
whereon his owner’s name aforesaid was inscribed, but the heathpolt
was dead; which messenger gave this further account of this rare
accident, that the day before, as near as could be computed, about a
quartes or half an hour after ten o’clock in the morning, the said
hawk, in the midst of Camelford town, struck down his game dead upon
the spot; so that by computation their flight straight forward, only
in half an hour’s space, was at least thirty-two Cornish miles.

For what reason Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, gives such a
slighting relation of this famous family, I know not; his words be
these: p. 154, Beyond Nants Mr. Basset possesseth Ty-hyddy, who
married Godolphin, his father Coffyn, and giveth for his arms as
aforesaid.

In this parish, at ――――, liveth Reginald An-gove, Gent. i. e. Reginald
the Smith, a sirname assumed in memory of his first ancestor, who was
by trade and occupation a smith.

And of this sort of sirname in England, thus speaks Verstegan,

  From whence came smith, all be it Knight or ’Squire?
  But from the smith that forgeth in the fire.

This Reginald Angove is that subtle crafty tinner, whom common fame
reports to have gotten a considerable estate by labouring,
adventuring, and dealing in tin, both in the mines below and blowing
houses above ground, by indirect arts and practices; for which, about
the 8th of William and Mary, he was indicted before the jury of
tinners (whereof the writer of these lines was summoned for one)
amongst other things, for putting hard heads of false metal and lead
in the midst of slabs of tin, melted and cast in his blowing-house, in
testimony whereof some pieces or slabs thereof was cut in pieces, and
the fallacy detected; whereupon the Grand Jury returned the bill of
indictment, indorsed, Billa Vera. But on his trial there was given a
verdict of acquittal.

_Carne Bray._ Upon the top of a very high rocky mountain in this
parish, which takes a large view over the land from the north to the
south sea, that is to say, from St. George’s channel to the British
ocean, and also towards the Land’s End and Scilly islands, stands
Castle Carne Bray, erected long before the art of guns was invented.
It is situate upon the summit of a large, lofty, and tremendous rock,
built four-square of lime and stone, about forty feet high and twenty
feet square; wherein, as appears from the beam holes, windows, and
chimneys, were two planchins, besides the leads of the top thereof,
though now there are not to be seen either leads or beams, only the
walls, windows, chimneys, and garrets thereof are still extant and
uniform, which, maugre all the force of wind and weather, are likely
to stand firm till the final consummation of all things. It hath but
one way of access or entrance into it, through a little hole
artificially cut in the rock, under the foundation of its wall, about
four feet high; the other parts thereof being surrounded with
inaccessible rocks, carnes, and downfalls. Some such castle or
fortification Cæsar mentions in his Commentary at Uxelodunum, for
Uchell-dun-en, i. e. the lofty fort or fortress [in Gallia]. I take
this castle to be the Watch Tower mentioned by Orosius, opposite to
such another in Gallicia; which Mr. Carew and Mr. Camden conjecture
stood near St. Ive’s. Near this castle, on the top of this mountain,
are divers circular walls or fortifications, made of rocks and
unwrought stones, after the British manner (see Gonwallo); and a never
intermitting spring, or fountain of water, for the use of the
inhabitants thereof. Probably this castle was built by some of the
Brays of Cornwall, or those that came into England with William the
Conqueror of that name, otherwise so called from the natural
circumstances of the place, Carne.

In this parish also I take it stands another mountain, though of less
magnitude, called Carne-Kye; but this place is much more famous and
notable for the great quantities of tin that have been for many ages,
and are still found and brought to land from the bottoms thereof, than
for its appellation, to the great enriching its lords of the soil and
adventurers.

There is no tradition or memory of the person who built this costly
and tremendous castle aforesaid, or tower; or for what use it was made
other than to dwell in it, comparatively above the middle region of
the air in those parts, more than what is expressed in the name
thereof, Bray’s Castle. Undoubtedly whatever human creature it was
that dwelt in it and possessed the same, he was a person that had
unparalleled confidence in the strength thereof, for his safety and
protection, such as never any person after his quitting ever attempted
to enjoy for the pleasure of his five senses.


TONKIN.

Tehidy; this lordship of Tehidy has been for many ages in the
possession of the ancient, famous, and knightly family of Bassets,
whose ancestors came out of France with William the Conqueror, and
were posted among the standing troops in this county under Robert Earl
of Morton.

Most certainly they were possessed of this lordship some short while
after the Conquest; and from hence have sprung many noble and famous
men in their generation.

Then, after copying Mr. Hals, Mr. Tonkin goes on to say,

At Carnekye is a considerable tin-work, chiefly pertaining to the
Bassets, out of which has been raised above a hundred thousand pounds
worth of tin, to the no small profit of the adventurers and of that
family.

At Nants or Nance (the valley) was the dwelling of an old and
well-regarded family of gentlemen, the Trengoves of Warlegan, the name
from Gove, a smith.

These gentlemen have returned to their ancient habitation of Trengoff,
in the parish of Warlegan; and the present possessors are denominated
Nance from the place, giving for their arms, Argent, a cross Sable.

Mr. Tonkin then adds,

Tehidy. The first owner that I meet with of this noble lordship was
Dunstanville; and then Basset, who was his grandson or nephew.
Reginald de Dunstanville was a Baron of the Realm in the time of King
Henry the First, and I take him to be the person meant in Testa de
Neville; ever since which this lordship has been in this ancient and
noted family. I shall only add, that the family now residing here, are
descended from George Basset, the third son of Sir John Basset, of
Umberly in Devonshire, and of Tehidy, who had Tehidy for his portion.

Leland saith, “Basset hath a right goodly lordship called Tehidy by
the Cornish. There was some time a park, now defaced.” And well he
might call it a right goodly lordship, since it hath the advowsons of
three large parishes, this parish, Camborne, and Redruth, with the
royalties of wrecks, &c. thereto belonging.

The present lord of the manor is John Pendarves Bassett, Esq. a minor,
and at present a Gentleman Commoner of Queen’s College, Oxford, who is
heir in expectance to his mother of all the estate of Pendarves of
Roscrow, and is likely to come into the estate of the greatest of his
ancestors in this county, by means of this accession, and of a rich
copper mine called the Pool, within this manor, which has been and is
still productive of tin and copper very rich in the ore.

The arms of Basset are, Or, three bars wavy Gules; but sometimes these
bars are Dancette and the field Argent, as they are painted in the
church windows of Camborne and Redruth.

The castle and park wall are still standing; and I have been informed
by several old men, particularly by the late Mr. Udy West, of Redruth,
that all the rocky grounds under Carnbray Castle, and from thence to
Porth-Treth, were covered with stout trees in their remembrance; so
that squirrels (of which there were many) could leap from one tree to
the other all the way. These were mostly destroyed in the Civil Wars,
and the rest were cut down by the old Lady Basset, who had it in
jointure, so that now there is not the least sign of any trees ever
having grown there.


THE EDITOR.

All the attempts at etymology in relation to this parish have been
omitted, on the ground of their not bearing even the slightest
resemblance to probability.

It has been conjectured that Il-luggan may have some reference to St.
Luke, as the parish feast takes place on the nearest Sunday to St.
Luke’s day, October the 18th. But Luggan, indicating an uncultivated
or uninclosed tract of ground, would seem to bear a near relation to
the state of this district at no remote period.

Mr. Whitaker adheres to Saint Illuggan on account of the parish being
designated as Ecclesia Sancti Illogani by the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester in 1294; and by Cardinal Wolsey. It has been already
remarked that many of the missionaries from the learned and zealous
Convents of Ireland, have left no other trace of their existence than
the names of parishes where they are usually honoured as Saints; in
the sense probably of Holy, and without implying the technical
deification of the Church of Rome, borrowed from ancient Mythology.
Saint Illuggan may have been one of those who converted the Celts of
Cornwall; but in the total absence even of tradition, this must be a
mere conjecture, and the name does not seem to bear any analogy to
others established by unquestionable authority.

Every attempt to decipher Tehidy has utterly failed. Mr. Angowe, who
has been brought forward by Mr. Hals in a manner not likely to acquire
for him much respect from posterity, resided at Trevenson, and left a
son, Mr. Abel Angowe. This gentleman was for some time a student at
Oxford, but ultimately preferred the law as an attorney. He married
Jane, daughter of Mr. Henry Phillips, of Carnequidden in Gulval, who
lived but a very short time; and Mr. Angowe died in consequence of a
fall from his horse about the year 1767. His large property became
divided among a great many distant relations, and has almost entirely
disappeared. The Angowes held Trevenson on lease for lives; the
freehold being in the families of Basset and Praed. Mr. Thomas Kivell,
steward to Lord Dunstanville, built a very excellent house there about
the year 1800, which has been still further improved by his successor
in the stewardship, Mr. Reynolds.

Menwinnion existed for centuries as a second house and appendage to
Tehidy; but it is now reduced in size, and converted to a farm.

Few parishes in Cornwall have flourished in an equal degree with
Illogan. It has abounded in the most productive mines of copper; the
dense population consequent to these great sources of employment has
covered the tracts formerly waste, with houses, with gardens, and with
cultivated fields; and a safe harbour has been constructed at
Portreath, for the reception of vessels engaged in the reciprocal
trade of exporting annually more than a hundred thousand tons of
copper ore to Swansea, and of bringing to Cornwall a still larger
quantity of coal.

And lastly, on the 25th of October 1809, when a jubilee was held all
over England, on the epoch of King George the Third commencing the
fiftieth year of his reign, Lord Dunstanville laid the first bar of an
iron tram road, for extending far into the country the facilities
afforded by this harbour and port, which has since been done;
notwithstanding a most illiberal attempt by persons interested in the
trade on the opposite coast, to convert a local Act of Parliament for
improving turnpike roads, the sole object of which must be to render
the conveyance of individuals and of property less expensive and more
commodious, into the means of obstructing this great improvement. See
the Journals of the House of Commons for the year 1817, and
particularly on the 16th of May.

But these, and all other improvements in Illogan, and its general
prosperity, are mainly owing to the continued residence, during six
centuries, of one of the most distinguished among those families,
which, having entered England in hostile array, assimilated themselves
to its laws, its customs, and its institutions; and have been found,
in all succeeding ages, the foremost defenders of its liberties and of
its independence.

The family of BASSET appears to have taken root in various parts of
its adopted country. Some branches were probably Barons from the
earliest times, some attained that dignity in subsequent periods;
others were distinguished in the law, and all in arms; and what must
not be omitted, the signature of Basset is found in the great charters
of our liberties, at the ratification of Magna Charta more than six
hundred years ago.

Mr. Hals brings down the family of Tehidy to Mr. John Pendarves
Basset, whom he leaves a Gentleman Commoner of Queen’s College,
Oxford. This gentleman married Ann, the only daughter and heiress of
Sir Edmund Prideaux, of Netherton in Devonshire, by Ann Hawkins,
daughter of Mr. Philip Hawkins, of Pennance, and died of the small-pox
in 1789, at the premature age of twenty-five. His brother, Mr. Francis
Basset, then took possession of the estate; but, unexpectedly to all
parties, the widow proved to be with child, and a son was born, who
lived to be sixteen, when the uncle came a second time into
possession. During this interval, the guardians of young Mr. Basset
finished the splendid house at Tehidy, commenced by his father; but,
notwithstanding this large expenditure, so great was the product of
the mines, and so considerable were the rents of the estate, that Mrs.
Basset is said to have acquired above a hundred thousand pounds from
her son’s personal effects; all of which was naturally left by her
among her own relations.

Mr. Francis Basset then settled principally at Tehidy; married
Margaret, daughter of Sir John St. Aubyn, and represented Penryn in
Parliament. Mr. Basset had three sisters; one married to the Rev. John
Collins, afterwards presented to the rectory of Redruth; Lucy, the
second daughter, married Mr. John Enys, of Enys, where his great
grandson John Samuel Enys, is now the representative of that ancient
family; the third married Nicholas Sweet Archer, of Trelaske and of
Truro.

Mr. Basset died in 1769, having only completed his fifty-fourth year,
leaving two sons, the eldest called after his own name; and John, who
became a clergyman, held the family living of Illogan, married Miss
Wingfield, and has left one son.

There were also four daughters; one married Mr. John Rogers, of
Penrose, the other three remained single.

Having now arrived at the period when Sir Francis Basset, jun. came
into possession of the family estate, the Editor would have found it
his most pleasing task to trace an outline, however slight, of this
distinguished person, in his splendid career through public and
through private life. If the topics for his commendation had been in
the least degree doubtful, the Editor would, indeed, have distrusted
his own power of discrimination in reference to one, whom he is proud
to claim, as the most liberal, generous, warm-hearted, and
disinterested friend that it has been his fortune to obtain in the
whole course of a pilgrimage through life, now exceeding sixty-seven
years; but recent events have made recollections painful, which used
to be associated with every thing most agreeable to the human mind.

Mr. Basset received the earlier part of his education at Harrow; but
about the period of his father’s decease, he removed to Eton, where,
in addition to useful and ornamental learning, these principles of
honour and liberality identified with the character of a true English
gentleman, are imbibed, practised, and wrought into habit at the early
age when _sincerum est vas_. After which, one can truly say

  You may break, you may ruin the vase if you will, But the scent of
  the roses will hang round it still.

After a residence of five years, from twelve to seventeen, at Eton,
Mr. Basset became a member of King’s College, Cambridge; and after
taking a degree, proceeded on the usual tour through France and Italy,
accompanied by the Rev. William Sandys, who, being the son of a former
Steward, had received his education for the express purpose of
becoming tutor to Mr. John Pendarves Basset, who is stated above to
have died at sixteen.

On his return to England, Mr. Basset found himself in possession of
abilities, joined to energy of mind; of a large estate, accompanied by
great accumulations from the mines; and in addition, of a local
influence assuring his introduction to Parliament. Thus circumstanced,
it was natural for him to take an active share in the politics of his
country, especially at a time when party spirit had acquired a height
never to be attained but in the midst of civil commotions.

The two first Princes of the German line had remained firmly united
with the Whig aristocracy, to whom they mainly owed what was then
denominated their legitimate or lawful crown, as distinguished from
others acquired by conquest or usurpation, or derived from a
succession founded on no other title than a mere continuance of
possession; but the victory of Culloden having finally extinguished
all hopes in those maintaining, or rather, one may suppose, professing
to maintain, indefeasible hereditary right, and having apparently
established the Whigs and the legitimate crown, proved nevertheless to
be the cause of their separation, and of the removal of the Whig
aristocracy from power at the next accession.

A mutual feeling naturally grew up, that time must transfer rights,
popularly termed indefeasible, from one race to another, when no
prospect of restoration remained; and the advisers of a young monarch
might easily persuade him, that new friends, holding such tenets,
would prove more acceptable supporters of their adopted crown than
those who originally bestowed it on principles of limitation. Hence
the parts imputed to Lord Bute and others, the re-action led by Mr.
Wilkes, the letters of Junius, and the final separation of America.

From combinations of these and of other causes, Mr. Basset found Lord
North first Minister of a Tory administration, and engaged in war with
America, and with France, Spain, and Holland; he eagerly joined that
party, and was subsequently hurried with it into the most fatal
measure that had occurred up to that period, the well known and well
remembered coalition.

But previously to this time, an event had taken place locally
connected with Cornwall, equally honourable to him who conducted a
large of body of miners to the relief of Plymouth, and to the miners
themselves who volunteered their services.

In the latter part of August 1779, the combined fleets of France and
Spain most unexpectedly steered into Plymouth Sound, and anchored
nearer to the shore than the base of the present Breakwater.

After the splendid successes of the Seven Years’ War, marine
fortifications had been wholly neglected as utterly useless, as never
to be wanted in future times; but in the sixteenth year after the
peace of 1763, the course of events demonstrated, that a naval force
may be re-established with much less effect, and in a shorter space of
time, than had been fondly imagined; and perhaps it also proved, that
military navies are not necessarily based on those used for mercantile
purposes.

A well-founded alarm spread immediately throughout the whole country,
that Plymouth was incompetent to sustain an attack; when instantly the
Cornish miners, worthy of the reputation long enjoyed by their
predecessors, rushed from all directions, and offered themselves as
volunteers to assist in defending Plymouth, and to exert their skill
and labour in perfecting the works; and Mr. Basset, acting as his
ancestors had done before, immediately placed himself at their head.
Thus a large and efficient force was, in the course of a few days,
added to our most important western arsenal.

On this occasion a patent was conferred on Mr. Basset, creating him a
Baronet; a gift rendered honourable by the cause for which it was
bestowed.

Since the nautical events of this period have attracted but little
attention from general historians, as they failed of producing any
decisive result, it may be well to state the most prominent facts.

The English fleet had been detained at home by various causes, and
especially by the court martial which honourably acquitted Admiral
Keppel. It sailed, however, at last to prevent a junction of the
French and Spanish fleets, but that junction had been effected; and
the combined fleet appeared in Plymouth Sound, while the fleet of
England was cruizing near Ushant, or in the Bay of Biscay.

Plymouth was undoubtedly open to their attack; and the individual
having the civil government of the dock-yard, is said to have actually
deliberated about taking the last desperate measure, for depriving the
enemy of every advantage to be derived from acquiring such stores as
might be consumed by fire.

The Ardent, a sixty-four gun ship of the line, arrived from
Portsmouth; and not suspecting that a hostile fleet could appear upon
our coast, and still less occupy our harbours, continued its course
into the midst of the ships, and became a prize; but not without
making a brave resistance, and endeavouring to escape by running
ashore.

The combined fleet, instead of attacking Plymouth, sailed in quest of
the adverse fleet, having manifestly taken their original course with
the view of giving battle; and what must be mentioned to their honour,
not a single act of wanton hostility was committed on any part of the
coast.

Every thing remained in suspense; watch and ward was established at
all points. The gentlemen in every parish assembled, such as had arms,
to take hasty instructions in military evolutions, while no one
ventured to whisper the extent of his apprehensions to others, or even
to avow them in his own mind; when, on the last day of August, both
fleets appeared between the Land’s End and the Lizard. In the night,
or in a fog, the fleets had passed each other; and the Editor
remembers seeing the English fleet collected together in a close mass,
making its way up the channel, to the amount of about forty sail of
the line, pursued by the combined fleet of nearly double that number,
in what is termed, line of battle a-head.

An action now seemed to be inevitable; but for some unknown cause, the
combined fleet discontinued the pursuit and returned to Brest, while
the English fleet anchored in Tor Bay.

On the dissolution of Parliament in 1784, Sir Francis Basset exerted
himself to the utmost, and made large sacrifices of money in support
of the unpopular coalition ministry, and he remained stedfast with
that defeated party till the whole political hemisphere became changed
in every aspect, by an event manifested in one country alone, but
originating from causes long in action, and imperceptively working
throughout an entire change of ancient institutions, with the very
form and shape perhaps of civilized society as it previously stood.

The conflict of opinion which gave rise to the French Revolution, has
but one parallel in the history of mankind; in the mental agitation,
almost amounting to phrensy, which accompanied and urged forward the
great change of religion three centuries before. That agitation and
conflict still divides Europe, although with diminished violence; and
possibly, therefore, an equal period may elapse before the questions,
relative to civil government and social order, shall have received
their final settlement, if, indeed, the period is ever to arrive.

Most of those in the dawn of youth possessed of eager minds and
liberal sentiments, were borne along by the torrent of passions,
excited by new systems, promising universal happiness, with increased
wisdom and virtue; founded on plans for reconstructing human society,
derived, it was said, from philosophical investigation, to be
substituted in the place of patched and mended institutions,
originating with savages in the forests of Scandinavia.

But Sir Francis Basset had the advantage of several years passed in
active experience with the world. He had learnt that the human
faculties are unequal to the formation of systems _a priori_, but must
submit to follow the more humble course of adaptation, tentative
experiment, and induction; and it was manifest that the new political
reasoners had entirely omitted to consider the real nature of the ὑλη
αμεταχειριστη forming the wide basis of society; or that they were
devising plans not suited to the actual state of things, but to one
which they fondly imagined was about to be.

Every page of history, moreover, might prove to those willing or
desirous of obtaining information from what has actually past, that
the crisis of change is invariably bad; and that objects, attained by
the sacrifice of an existing generation, have very frequently proved
of less value than those for which they had been substituted. Parties,
from their very natures, are known to run into extremes; it is
probable, therefore, that the leaders opposed to Mr. Pitt professed
much greater admiration of the new principles than they really felt;
such professions were, however, made; and Sir Francis Basset
concurring in opinion with many of the wisest, the best informed, and
of those most deeply interested in the welfare of the country, that
the safety of the state was at issue, added his weight to what would
now be termed the Conservative scale.

Sir Francis Basset, so distinguished by personal qualities and
attainments, by the antiquity of his family, by the achievements of
his ancestors, and by fortune, had long been designated in public
opinion as a person proper to be placed in the House of Peers; and
accordingly, on the 17th of July 1796, an hereditary seat in
Parliament was bestowed on him by the King, together with the nominal
Barony of Dunstanville, so called after Barons of that name, in the
time of Henry the First, Henry the Second, Richard Cœur de Lion, John,
and Henry the Third, who were equally connected with his family and
with the reigning family of Plantagenet.

A second creation took place on the 7th of November in the following
year, of Baron Basset, with a special remainder to his daughter in
failure of male issue.

Lord Dunstanville has from this period continued to support the
genuine character of a dignified English gentleman; discharging his
parliamentary duties in the manner deemed most useful to the interests
of his country; executing the office of a magistrate to the benefit,
and to the entire satisfaction, of his neighbourhood; setting an
example most worthy of general imitation, as the possessor of an
extensive landed estate, and as a most liberal proprietor of mines.
Kind and benevolent to every one, esteemed in the highest degree by
his private friends and relations, and certainly placed by general
acclamation, in regard to all these qualities and circumstances taken
together, as by far the first man in the county which he has benefited
and adorned.

The Editor has written this imperfect and inadequate sketch of Lord
Dunstanville with a heavy heart; for although his countenance
brightens at the presence of a friend, and memory still presents some
images of things past by, and reason continues to discriminate the
ideas brought into view, yet such are the ways of Providence, leading,
as we hope, believe, and trust to universal good, that a wreck only
remains of what used to excite our admiration, our respect, and our
esteem.

Lord Dunstanville married, May the 16th 1780, Frances Susanna,
daughter of John Hippesley Cox, Esq. of Stone Easton in Somersetshire,
who has left an only daughter, the Hon. Frances Basset. He married
secondly, Harriet, daughter of Sir William Lemon.

  Illoggan measures 8,028 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         11,334    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1887    0    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   2895  |    4078  |    5170  |    6072
    giving an increase of 110 per cent. very nearly, in 30 years.
  The present rector, the Rev. George Treweeke, presented
    by Lord de Dunstanville in 1822.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This extensive parish resembles that of Camborne in its geological
structure. Its southern portion rests on granite, which at Carnarthen
abounds in shorl; and at Carnkie it contains a bed of porphyry, with
crystals of felspar and of shorl; and at the same place another bed,
the basis of which more resembles compact shorl rock than it does
compact felspar. Near Portreath, and from thence to Perth Towan, the
slate appears to differ from that of Camborne; and at Perth Towan it
contains short irregular veins of calcareous spar, as at Porthalla in
St. Kevern, and at other places on the borders of the calcareous
series.




ST. JOHN’S.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon the north Anthony,
east Maker, west Sheviock, south the British channel. The modern name
John is derived from the tutelar guardian and patron of the Church,
St. John the Evangelist. In the Domesday tax this parish was rated
under the district or manor of Makertone. In the Inquisition into the
value of Cornish benefices, made by the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester 1294, Ecclesia Sancti Johannis, in decanatu de
Eastwellshire, is valued xl_s._ viii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition
12_l._ 4_s._ 4_d._; the patronage in ――――, the incumbent Tarr. The
parish is rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax 1696, 72_l._ 0_s._
8_d._


TONKIN.

The manor of Insworth,

A Peninsula on whose neck, says Mr. Carew, standeth an ancient house
of the Champernons; and descended by his daughters and heirs to
Fortescue, Monck, and Trevilian, three gentlemen of Devon. The site is
naturally both pleasant and profitable; to which the owner, by his
ingenious experiments, daily addeth an artificial surplusage. Mr.
Tonkin then adds, this estate (as I am better informed) being in the
parish of Maker, I shall there treat more fully of it.

Sir Richard Champernon, of Madberie in Devon, Knt. had by Catherine
his wife, daughter of Ralph Daubeney, Knt. two sons, Richard and John.
He died in 1418, and gave this place to the said John, who lived here,
and left only one son, a Richard Champernon, who by his wife, the
daughter and heir of Sir John Hamley, Knt. left three daughters, one
of whom married Humphrey Monck, of Potheridge in Devon, Esq.

The said Sir John Champernon was Sheriff of Cornwall 24 Henry VI.
1445, as his son Richard in the first year of Edward IV. 1461.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals has not gone into any particulars respecting this parish; but
he has occupied several pages with the real and with the legendary
histories of the Evangelist, to whom the Church is dedicated; these
are omitted as unsuited to a local history.

Mr. Lysons says, that the manor of Tregenhawke, situated partly in
this parish and partly in Rume, and feudatory to the manor of East
Anthony, did belong to the family of Eliot, by whom it was alienated
in 1635 to Richard Treville, merchant; and that from the Trevilles it
passed by coheiresses to the families of Cross and Trelawny. The whole
now belongs to Lord Graves, who has also the manor of Withroe, called
in this parish Winnow.

The right of presentation is appendant to the honour of East Anthony.

An excavation in the cliff at Whitsand Bay is noticed as having been
made by Mr. Luggan, the proprietor of a farm called Freathy, by way of
exercise and amusement.

The church is, perhaps, of less dimensions than any other in Cornwall,
being no more than fifty-six feet long by eighteen in breadth; it
bears the appearance of antiquity, and is decorated by some monuments,
one to the family of Beel, with their arms, Azure, three griffins’
heads erased Argent.

  This parish measures 872 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          1,016    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           108   19    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    110  |    143   |    178   |    150
    giving an increase of about 36 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present rector, the Rev. William Rowe, instituted in 1808.

Dr. Boase says of the geology of this little parish, that its rocks
are precisely similar to those of East Anthony, to which it adjoins;
and may almost be considered as forming a part.




ST. ISSEY.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Pedyr, and hath upon the north the
channel of Padstow habour, south and east St. Breoch and part of St.
Colomb, west little Pedyrick. In Domesday roll 20 William I. 1087,
this district was taxed either under the jurisdiction of Polton or
Burge, now Burgus (i. e. Turris). In the Inquisition of the Bishops of
Lincoln and Winchester into the value of Cornish benefices, Ecclesia
de Sancti Issei, in decanatu de Pedyr, is rated iiii_l._ vi_s._
viii_d._ Vicar ejusdem xlvi_s._ viii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition
9_l._; the patronage in the Dean and Chapter of Exeter; the incumbent
Harris, the rectory in Wright. The parish is rated to the 4_s._ in the
pound Land Tax 1696, 161_l._

There hath been for many ages in Cornwall, a certain sort of unlearned
men called attornies, who have taken upon them to solve all questions,
debts, damages, and difficulties whatsoever, by exciting or increasing
them, under pretence of friendship and good council, who are often
called upon to the assistance of men of lazy or weak understanding to
their undoing.

For instance thereof, I well remember in this parish of St. Issey
there had lived two brethren of the surname of Warne, who having some
small disputes or controversies one with the other, not determined,
concerning a tenement of land in fee, containing about fifty acres, at
a place called ――――; they appealed to two attornies, viz. Joseph
Hawkey, of St. Colomb, and Degory King, of St. Breock in Pider, who
run this their controversy so far in law and equity, that they were
not able to pay the cost thereof as punctually as those attornies
expected; thereupon they brought actions at law against their clients
for the same, and at length obliged the two brothers of the Warnes
aforesaid, to sell the inheritance of their lands aforesaid to their
attornies, the one half thereof to Hawkey and the other moiety thereof
to King, now in quiet possession thereof.

The inhabitants of this parish will tell you by tradition, that the
tutelar guardian of this church is one St. Giggy, who in a place so
called in this parish, hath yet extant a walled consecrated well, or
spring of water, where heretofore he heard and judged cases of
conscience for the cure of souls; but all further history of him is
wanting, save that they tell me St. Issey is only a corruption of
Giggy.

Hale-wyn in this parish (or Hall-wyn, the fair or white hill, as Hal
is a hill, and Wyn or Gwyn white or fair. Goonwyn in Lelant the fair
downs; Hale is a moor. Whitaker.) This lordship was from Edward the
Fourth’s days one of the dwellings of the Champernons, of Intsworth,
near Saltash; and in this place they had a great and magnificent
house, as appears from the walls and ruinous rubbish and downfalls
thereof yet to be seen, as also their domestic chapel and burying
place; in the glass windows of which chapel was lately to be seen this
inscription: “Orate pro anima Domini Ricardi de Campo Arnulphi;” and
beneath the same his paternal coat armour, viz. Gules, a saltire
Varry, between twelve cross-crosslets Or; which shews that he derived
his blood and bones from the Champernownes, of Clyst Champernowne in
Devon. For the Champernownes of Umberleigh and North Taunton, near
Modbury, gave for their armes, the one Gules, a saltire Varry; the
other, Gules, a saltire Varry between twelve billets Argent. [The name
is originally Latin, De Campo Arnulphi, then formed by the Norman
French into Champernulph, and finally formed by them, or by the
Cornish, into Champernown. Whitaker.]

Cannall-Lidgye in this parish is the voke lands of a considerable
manor, now in several persons’ hands; much of those lands being in
possession of Boscawen as I take it; the high rents are in Hart. As
part of the same, is the possession and birthplace of my very kind
friend and neighbour Thomas Carthew, Esq. Barrister-at-Law, who by his
indefatigable study and labour, first in the inferior practice of the
law under Mr. Tregena, without being a perfect Latin grammarian,
always using the English words for matters or things in his
declarations, where he understood not the Latin; who was at length, by
a mandamus from the Lord Keeper North, called to the bar, and the
generous practice of the law for some years, when afterwards in the
latter end of the reign of King William the Third, he had a call for
being made a Sergeant-at-Law, under which circumstance he grew into
such great fame and reputation that he is likely to make a
considerable addition of riches to his paternal estate.

He married North, a relation to the Lord Keeper North aforesaid; his
father, Baker, of Lanteglos, by Fowey; his grandfather Lawry; and
giveth for his arms, Argent, a chevron Azure, between three ducks
Proper. The name is local, compounded of Car-dew, or Car-thew, i. e.
Rock Black in this parish. Long since the writing hereof, those his
lands of Canaligye are all sold by Mr. Carthew’s son and heir to two
of the brothers of Trebilliocks.

Trevance in this parish, i. e. the town upon the rising or advanced
land, is the dwelling of Richard Harris, Gent. that married Vivyan, of
Tollskidy; his father Moyle.

Tre-vor-ike in this parish, [Pryce, in his Archæologia Cornu-Britannica
says, Ick I take to signify either a creek, rivulet, or brook, as
Trevorick, the town or the brook. Whitaker.] is the dwelling of
William Cornish, Gent. that married Cornish, his father Tonkyn;
originally descended from one William Cornish that settled here
tempore Queen Mary, a Welshman. To this place belongs a sea-mill, a
healing or slate stone quarry, and a lime kiln, commonly made in
jointure to those gentlemen’s wives, to win whom in marriage this
argument amongst others was commonly used,

  She that will this Squire marry,
  Shall have the mill, the kill, and the quarry;

now all spent and wasted by ill conduct, and those lands sold to a
relation of his surnamed Cornish, or some other.

At Carthew, or Legarike, in this parish, is a considerable lead or
copper mine in the lands of Bearford or Bond; wherein many labouring
tinners are much employed as miners, and reap much benefit thereby, as
well as the lords of the lands or soil thereof.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not any thing in addition to what is transcribed from
Mr. Hals.


THE EDITOR.

The church of this parish is called in some ancient writings,
Eglos-Crock and Nansant. The Dean and Chapter of Exeter are
impropriators of the great tithes, and patrons of the vicarage. The
church is very old, but decorated with a lofty tower; there are
monuments to Mr. Thomas Carthew, and to some of the vicars. The church
town is the largest village in this parish, and lies nearly midway
between Padstow and Wade Bridge. Mr. Lysons says that the manor of St.
Ide, extending from this parish into the adjacent parishes of Little
Petherick, St. Ervan, Breock, Padstow, and Mawgan, belonged
successively to the families of Hiwis, Coleshill, and Arundell, and at
a later period to the Morices. It was purchased by the late Mr. Thomas
Rawlings, of Padstow.

And Mr. Lysons adds that, Blayble, a small farm in St. Issey, now
belonging to Mr. Richard Williams, who occupies it, was at an early
period the seat of a branch of the Arundell family.

  This parish measures 3,932 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          2,050    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           508   13    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   522   |    632   |    660   |    720
    giving an increase of 38 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Dr. Boase says, that St. Issey has the same geological structure as
the adjacent parish of St. Breock.




ST. IVES.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the east and north
the Irish Sea, south Leland, west Tywednick; as for the modern name,
it is taken from the tutelar guardian of the Church, which, as Mr.
Camden tells us (upon what authority I know not) was one Iia, an Irish
woman that preached the Gospel here. In the Domesday Tax, the 20th of
William I. 1087, both the town and parish were taxed under the
jurisdiction of Ludduham, now Lugian-lese manor, still extant here,
formerly pertaining to the King or Earl of Cornwall, now to the Duke
of Bolton, of whom the town of St. Ives’ privileges are held; and the
same manor is held, as I take it, of the Earl of Cornwall’s Castle of
Lancaster under certain rents.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the
value of the Cornish benefices 1294, “ecclesia de Lelant in decanatu
de Penwith,” is only taxed xxii_l._ xviii_s._ iiii_d._ without mention
either of St. Ives or Tywednick, probably at that time they were
neither erected or endowed; in Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, Ewny juxta
Lelant and St. Ives are rated together 22_l._ 11_s._ 10½_d._; St.
Ewny, that is to say Tywednike, and St. Ives being consolidated in
their mother church Lelant, did pass in presentation with it; the
patronage in the Bishop of Exeter, who endowed them; the incumbent
Hawkins, now Polkinhorn, the rectory in possession of Pitz; and the
parish rated at 4_s._ per pound Land Tax 1696, 158_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._

This town, as Mr. Camden saith, was formerly called Pendenis or
Pendunes, the head fort, fortress, or fortified place; probably from
the little island here, containing about six acres of ground, on which
there stands the ruins of a little old fortification and a chapel,
betwixt which island and the bending shore, or sea cliff, stands an
indifferent safe road for ships to lie at anchor with some winds,
which gives opportunity of trade and merchandize to the townsmen
(whose town is situate thereon) and also for fishing, whereby they
have much enriched themselves of late years.

The manor of Ludduham, formerly comprehending the parishes of
Ludduham, Lelant, Tywednick, and St. Ives, now so many districts, is a
lordship of great antiquity, and was privileged with the jurisdiction
of a court leet before the Norman Conquest, for under that name it was
then taxed (as aforesaid) though its now transnominated to Luggyan
Lese; in which stands the borough of St. Ives, which claims the
privileges thereof by prescription and tenure, all which are confirmed
by a charter of incorporation from King Charles I. afterwards by
another from King James II. by the name of the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Burgesses, which consists of a Mayor, ten Aldermen, and eleven Common
Councilmen; the Members of Parliament elected by freemen, alias scot
and lot men free there, who sign the indenture; the arms of which
borough is a cluster and branch of grapes or pomegranates; and the
precept on the writs for electing Members of Parliament from the
Sheriff, or removing any action at law depending in the court leet of
St. Ives, the writ must be thus directed: Preposits et Burgensibus
Burgi sui de St. Ives in Com. Cornub. salutem.

The chief inhabitants of this town are, Mr. Hitchins, Mr. Beer, Mr.
Stephens, Mr. Hickes; in which town is held a market weekly on
Saturdays, and a fair annually on Saturday before Advent Sunday.

Sir Francis Basset procured their first charter of incorporation, who,
being a Burgess, gave a silver cup of 5_l._ value to this corporation
for ever, with this inscription,

  If any discord doth arise,
  Within the borough of St. Ives,
  ’Tis my desire this cup of love,
  An instrument of peace may prove.

Trenwith in this parish, was the voke lands of a considerable manor,
privileged with a court leet before the Norman conquest, that
heretofore extended itself over divers parishes; for by that name it
was taxed in Domesday book, 20 William I. 1087, from which place was
transnominated an ancient family of gentlemen, now in possession
thereof, from that of Bayliff now to Trenwith, who have flourished
here in good fame and reputation beyond the memory of man, since Henry
VIII. The present possessor is Thomas Trenwith, Gent. that married
Lanyon; and giveth for his arms, Argent, on a bend cotised Sable,
three roses of the Field.

Those lands of Trenwith were of old pertaining to the Earls or Kings
of Cornwall, afterwards to the Kings of England; and were held by the
tenure of knight service by such as possessed them, if not from King
Arthur’s days, (see Dundagall) yet from William the Conqueror’s, who,
in imitation of him, gave bartons, manors, fields, large territories
of land to his favourites, under the tenures of villeinage and knight
service in capite, by means of which knight service those tenants were
obliged to do him any necessary service, either in wars or to his
royal person, for the performing whereof he took their oaths in public
courts, both of homage and fealty; and by reason of this tenure he
disposed of the bodies of their heirs in marriage as he listed, and
retained in his custody and wardship their whole inheritance till they
accomplished the age of twenty-one years; and by those examples other
men of great possessions did the like. Those lands of Trenwith,
tempore Henry IV. were held by that tenure in capite by Edmund
Plantagenet, alias Beaufort, Marquess of Dorset, grandchild to John
Duke of Lancaster, 21 Henry VI. 1442, consisting of four knights’
fees, 3 Henry IV. (See Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 39). He was
slain at the battle of St. Alban’s 1450, on the part of Henry VI.
against Richard Duke of York; as also was his son Henry on the same
part after the battle of Hexham, and his brother Edmund after
Tewkesbury 1471, beheaded by King Edward IV. and his whole estate
confiscated to the Crown; from whence Bayliff, now Trenwith, purchased
part of those lands, which still pays high rent to the Kings of
England. In like manner Humphrey Plantagenet, fourth son of King Henry
IV. held by the same tenure in Conerton, Binerton, Drineck, and
Ludgian, four knight’s fees of land in those places. He was impeached
of treason at the Parliament held at St. Edmund’s Bury in Suffolk;
afterwards murdered; and those and all other his lands confiscated.


TONKIN.

This church is a vicarage, valued in the King’s books, together with
Lelant and Towednack, with which it passeth in presentation, at 22_l._
11_s._ 10½_d._; the collation in the Bishop of Exeter; the late
incumbent Mr. Hawkins, now Polkinhorne. The sheaf in possession of
Edward Noseworthy, Esq.

The town of St. Ives, in Mr. Carew’s days, was of small value or
consequence for wealth, buildings, or inhabitants; although it now be
much altered in these particulars, and equals several other fellow
corporations. Of old it hath been privileged by the Earls of Cornwall
with the jurisdiction of a Court Leet, and with sending two Members to
Parliament; also with fairs and a weekly market.

On the island (or peninsula) north of St. Ives, standeth the ruins of
an old chapel, wherein God was duly worshipped by our ancestors the
Britons, before the church of St. Ives was erected or endowed; betwixt
which island and the shore is an indifferent roadstead with some winds
for ships to lie at anchor.

This town is particularly famous for the art of catching fish; in
which trade or occupation of late they have been attended with good
success, to the great advancement of their wealth and reputation. The
chief inhabitants of which place were Mr. Hitchins, Mr. Trevilion, Mr.
Beare, &c. In this port his Majesty hath his Custom House collector,
surveyor, comptroller, and waiters, both for sea and land.

Trenwith, in this parish, is the seat of an old family of gentlemen,
from thence denominated de Trenwith.


THE EDITOR.

St. Ives has grown, since the time of Mr. Carew, into a place of
considerable importance, participating in the general prosperity of
the whole country; and deriving great local advantages from the
extension of its fisheries, from the construction of a pier, and from
the extraordinary increase of trade at the adjacent port of Hayle.

Fish of almost every kind, frequenting the coast of Cornwall, are
taken at St. Ives; but the fishery absorbing all the others in its
magnitude is the taking of pilchards.

Pilchards are taken in two different ways quite distinct from each
other.

The first, most ancient, most certain, and therefore of greatest
importance to the inhabitants of the neighbourhood, is called
drifting.

Boats sail in the open sea, drawing after them a great number of nets
appended to each other, provided with small leads and corks at the
opposite sides, and extending in all to a very great length. The
meshes of these nets are made of such a size as to admit the head of a
pilchard to pass through them, but not the body; in consequence such
fish as strike against the net are retained suspended by their gills,
acting in the nature of a barb.

The second method is on a much more extensive scale, uncertain as to
success; but occasionally giving fortunes to those concerned in
carrying it on, by the gain of one prosperous year.

This method is founded entirely on the habit common to all the clupea
genus of congregating in large shoals, and coming occasionally near
the shore into shallow water, and into places where the ground is free
from rocks; this latter circumstance is peculiarly favourable in the
St. Ives Bay, and the ground is moreover covered to the depth of
several feet by a fine sand, composed entirely of shells, reduced
almost to a state of powder.

All the most favourable stations are occupied during the proper season
of the year by large boats, having nets on board measuring four
hundred and forty yards in length by twenty-seven yards in breadth,
capable therefore of covering nearly two and an half statute acres.
These nets are provided with very heavy weights at one of their sides,
so as to sink them firmly on the ground, and with large corks to make
them buoyant on the other. Two large boats and one smaller, as an
attendant, are appropriated to each net; and when a shoal is
discovered approaching, by a well-known change of colour and a ripple
on the water, these boats, sometimes directed also by signals from the
shore, move in opposite directions, extending the immense net to
intercept the fish, and then to close it behind them. In this way a
quantity sufficient to fill a thousand casks, after being pressed,
have been frequently secured at one time, and on some occasions much
more. The casks are hogsheads of fifty-four gallons, and contain about
two thousand five hundred pilchards, so that the thousand hogsheads
make two millions and a half secured by one net.

The fish are taken out of the sea by raising them to the surface of
the water in smaller nets, used within the great net forming an
artificial pond; and finally they are dipped up in baskets. The first
net, called a seyne, frequently remaining in its original position for
several days, or perhaps gently slided towards the shore.

Pilchards are preserved for exportation in the following manner: they
are laid in regular heaps along the sides of walls sheltered by roofs
to a height easily reached, and to a depth suited to the ordinary
length of the arm, where they are almost concealed by the great
quantity of salt strewed with them; three hundred and thirty-six
pounds, or three great hundred weight of salt, being allowed for each
pressed hogshead. In this state they remain thirty-six days, while oil
continually oozing from them is received in pits; they are then rinced
in water, and laid with great care in casks made purposely with open
joints, where they receive a strong pressure through the medium of a
long beam and weights; more oil is then collected, and the casks,
closed up, are fitted for sale. Nine of these packages, independent of
the wood, are said to weigh two tons; so that in their final state,
the quantity of a thousand hogsheads, not unfrequently caught at one
time, must weigh above two hundred and twenty tons.

The quantity of oil is very considerable, varying from two to five
gallons from each hogshead, but of inferior quality. Pilchards thus
cured are called fumados, which seems to imply their having been
originally smoked like red herrings; their chief consumption takes
place in Spain and Italy.

The pilchards used for home consumption are invariably picked; these
are opened and washed, and then rubbed with salt, about seven pounds
to the hundred, and preserved in jars or troughs.

The herring, pilchard, sprat, anchovy, and several other species, are
arranged by icthyologists under the genus clupea; the herring and
pilchard being adjacent to each other. The pilchard is rather less in
size than the herring, has larger and firmer scales, and contains much
more oil. There is one discriminating circumstance quite obvious; the
pilchard, suspended by its dorsal fin, remains in equilibrio, while
the herring, under similar circumstances, dips towards its head.

The pier was built under the authority of an Act of Parliament passed
in the year 1767, after a personal survey and a report from the
celebrated Mr. Smeaton, which is printed in his works. This shelter
from every wind has equally tended to improve the fishery, to increase
the general trade of the place, and to protect vessels bound for
Hayle; but the fishery is indebted in a still greater degree to
another Act of Parliament, carried through the legislature by the late
Mr. Humphry Mackworth Praed, who had the honour first of representing
this place, and then the county.

A caution had existed time of mind, by which any boat provided with a
seyne net, having taken possession of one of the favourable stations
or stems, might retain it till the net had been used to inclose a
shoal, or, according to the technical expression, had been shot; and
this right extended from one season to another: persons in possession
of a stem were therefore unwilling to lose it, except for a
considerable prize, and small shoals were generally allowed to escape.
By Mr. Praed’s Act, so great and so beneficial a change was made,
that, arranging the succession in an equitable manner, it allowed each
boat to hold its stem but for twenty-four hours, and consequently
every shoal, however small, was eagerly secured.

The nets are preserved for a long succession of years by steeping them
in a decoction of oak bark as frequently as they are used; and, what
would scarcely have been expected, the fish oil without this
preservative, would destroy the twine in a very short time.

It seems that these nets must have been originally introduced from
Dungarvon in Ireland, since they are still said to be braided
according to the Dungarvon mesh, but no similar fishery is remembered
at that place. Fish, however, of all kinds not only migrate through
distant seas, but without any known cause, frequently leave one part
of a coast and resort to another, returning after uncertain intervals
to their former haunts.

There is one custom at St. Ives, of which the origin and specific
meaning are entirely lost. So soon as shoals of pilchards are
discovered in the bay, all the people, and more especially the
children, run round the town shouting, HEVA! HEVA! with all their
might.

St. Ives was distinguished in the last century by the birth and
residence for some years of a very eminent scholar, the Rev. Jonathan
Toup. His father, who died in 1721, was lecturer of that Town, as the
church being a daughter church to Lelant, is entitled to service from
the vicar only once in three weeks; his mother was the heiress of the
family of Busvargus, long settled at Busvargus in St. Just.

He was born in 1713; and it is apprehended received the rudiments of
classical learning from his father. He became a Commoner of Exeter
College, Oxford, and having taken the usual degree of Bachelor of
Arts, obtained Holy Orders in 1736. He was Curate of Philleigh in that
year, and of Burian in 1738. He continued to pursue, with
extraordinary diligence, the study of Greek. He became Rector of St.
Martin’s, near Looe in 1750, through some private interest; but the
Vicarage of St. Merran and a Prebend in the Cathedral of Exeter in
1774, were procured from the Bishop of Exeter by his literary friend
Doctor William Warburton, Bishop of Gloucester.

Mr. Toup took his Master of Arts degree at Cambridge in 1756, when he
had advanced towards the middle of life, and apparently as a
qualification for his second living.

His chief work is, perhaps, “Emendationes in Suidam; in quibus plurima
loca Veterum Græcorum, Sophoclis et Aristophanis in primis, tum
explicuntur tum emaculantur.” These were printed in three parts, which
came out in three volumes in the years 1760, 1764, and 1766; and were
followed in 1775 by “Appendiculum Notarum in Suidam.” All these have
since been reprinted at Leipsic in four volumes octavo; and the whole
has been recently incorporated into a most splendid and learned
edition of Kusterus’ Suidas, by the very Reverend Thomas Gaisford,
D.D., Dean of Christ Church, and Regius Professor of Greek in the
University of Oxford.

Mr. Toup gave also to the world by far the best edition that has
appeared of Longinus. He also assisted the celebrated Mr. Thomas
Warton in his edition of Theocritus; and added, “Curæ posteriores,
sive Appendicula Notarum atque Emendationum in Theocritum, Oxonii
nuperrime publicatum.” He also published a letter to Bishop Warburton
under the title of, “Epistola Critica ad Virum celeberrimum Gulielmum
(Warburton) Episcopum Glocestriensem.”

Nothing in particular is remembered of Mr. Toup’s private life. He
died unmarried at the Rectory of St. Martin’s in 1785; and the
delegates of the Oxford press, in regard for so eminent a scholar, and
in return for a present of MSS. made by his niece and executrix, have
erected a monument to his memory in St. Martin’s Church.

Another gentleman, although not a native of the town, may be noticed
here.

Mr. John Knill was born in the eastern part of Cornwall, and served
his clerkship as an attorney in Penzance, from thence he removed to
the office of a London attorney, where having distinguished himself by
application and intelligence, he was recommended to the Earl of
Buckinghamshire, who at that time held the political interest of St.
Ives, to be his local agent.

After residing for some time at St. Ives, Mr. Knill was sent on a
mission to the West Indies, highly honourable to his abilities and to
his character, with an authority for inspecting all the custom-houses
and their establishments; and, if sufficient cause should appear, with
power to suspend any one, however high, from his office.

Having executed the functions thus delegated with integrity and
moderation, he returned to the collectorship at St. Ives, and engaged
in a very anomalous undertaking, at that time sanctioned and
encouraged by the government, which consisted in equipping small
vessels to act as priviateers against smugglers. In this species of
warfare he is said to have been very successful; and on the breaking
out of the Dutch war in the war with America, these vessels were ready
to act their part in a practice most disgraceful to a civilized
nation, and which every good, honourable, and humane man must hope
will never again be repeated. In this way vessels laden with private
property, wholly unprepared for resistance, utterly unacquainted with
the nations being at war, were plundered and robbed of whatever they
contained, and unoffending passengers were exposed to insult and
violence.

Mr. Knill was hurried by the force of circumstances, contrary to his
inclination and habits, and to his deep subsequent regret, into doing
what others did, and participating in these unhallowed gains. The
Editor understands, however, that he showed every kindness in his
power to some objects of compassion who were made prisoners; and that
he restored several articles of their more valued property at his own
individual loss.

Soon after this time Mr. Knill took up the singular fancy of erecting
a triangular pyramid on a hill overlooking St. Ives, with the
intention of his being buried in a proper receptacle hollowed in the
base; and he invested a sum of money in trust for the support of some
half ludicrous and half serious dances and processions, to be repeated
every fifth year.

He however, removed, to London, resided in Gray’s Inn, was called to
the bar, and became a bencher; and having departed this life on the
29th of March 1811, was buried, by the direction of his last will, in
St. Andrew’s church, Holborn. The monument is ornamental to the
country: on one side of the pyramid are inscribed the words, “John
Knill;” on a second, “I know that my Redeemer liveth;” and on the
third the word “Resurgam.”

The monument stands on the Editor’s land, and pays him sixpence
a-year, secured on a farm of some value, with a power of distress.

Mr. Knill was undoubtedly a man of considerable talent. When the Earl
of Buckinghamshire took the office of Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, he
selected Mr. Knill for his private secretary; but not liking the
bustle, nor perhaps the responsibility of this situation, he returned
to St. Ives. His philanthropy and general kindness were known to all;
but a variety of idle fancies and singularities, unworthy of his
talents and experience in the world, are remembered, while the
estimable qualities of his heart are perhaps forgotten.

An extraordinary event took place at St. Ives on the 17th of Feb.
1780.

Some time in the month of December preceding, a large body of troops
had been embarked at New York for the attack on Charlestown in South
Carolina; and in a public dispatch from Gen. Sir Henry Clinton, dated
March the 9th, he says, “only one ship is missing, having on board a
detachment of Hessians; and supposed to have borne away for the West
Indies.” The Editor has ascertained by particular inquiries, that the
vessel alluded to in this dispatch nearly reached Charlestown, the
place of its destination, having about two hundred and fifty German
soldiers on board with provision suited to so short a voyage, when
being run foul of by a ship of war in a gale of wind, and injured in
the masts and bowsprit, the vessel could sail no other way than before
the westerly wind, then blowing with violence; most fortunately the
direction of the wind continued steadily in the same direction, and
the passengers arrived safe, but nearly famished, at St. Ives on the
day above-mentioned. St. Ives and the neighbourhood contended with
each other in efforts, not merely to relieve the distress of these
unfortunate persons, but to make them comfortable and happy; the best
attainable lodgings were provided for the private men, and the
officers were daily invited to gentlemen’s houses. Their sufferings as
foreigners on behalf of England, had excited general compassion,
heightened by the reflection that they were not engaged in maintaining
any cause in which their country had an interest, that they were not
volunteers, but had been purchased by this nation from an individual
entrusted with unlimited power, for the good of a portion of mankind,
which he had most basely abused for the sake of private gain, in a
manner that must commit his name and memory to infamy, and to the
execration of mankind; nor can the administration be freed from blame
that hired these human beings at so much a-day, and agreed to give the
Landgrave of Hesse Cassel a certain sum for every one killed, or
missing, or lamed.

Mr. Hals and Mr. Tonkin have enumerated several names of families at
St. Ives. In recent times, that of Stephens has acquired an undisputed
superiority.

That family, although merchants up to the decease of Mr. John Stephens
in 1764, had been long in possession of landed property in St. Ives;
and the Editor has seen the original of the following receipt given at
the accession of King James the First.

                       XXII^o die Octobris, An^o Dom^i 1603.

     Received of John Stephens of the Burrough of St. Ives in the
     Hundred of Penwith, within the county of Cornwall, Gen^t,
     for his composition with his Ma^{ies} Commissioners for his
     not appearing at the Coronation of our said Souvraigne Lord
     the King, for to receive the Order of Knighthood, according
     to his Highness’ proclaymasion in that behalfe, the sum of
     sixteen pounds.
          I saye received                             XVI^{li}
                                     FRA. GODOLPHIN, Coll.

Mr. John Stephens married Mary, one of the three daughters of Mr.
Samuel Phillips, of Pendrea in Gulval.

This gentleman appears to have been very successful in his various
concerns of merchandise and fisheries, as he added largely to his
landed property by purchases in the immediate neighbourhood of St.
Ives, and also in the parishes of Newlyn and St. Enoder. He acted for
many years as agent to the Earl of Buckinghamshire in managing the
political concerns of the town; but at last broke off the connection
by getting his son, Mr. Samuel Stephens, returned on a vacancy.

Mr. John Stephens had a numerous family; his eldest son went to
Holland, according to the practice of those times, with the view of
continuing his father’s mercantile concerns; and the next son, Samuel,
became a member of the University of Cambridge to prepare himself for
the church, and probably with the expectation of obtaining Lelant and
St. Ives, but the death of his elder brother caused this to be
relinquished. He married Anne, daughter of Mr. Seaborn, of Bristol;
and on his father’s decease about the year 1764, he disposed of every
thing connected with the trade and fishery of this place, and having
abandoned the sect of Presbyterians, to which all his family and
relations had been strongly attached, he went so far as to pull down
the meeting-house, and to withdraw his support from its minister;
proceedings well remembered to his disadvantage on subsequent
occasions.

About the year 1774, Mr. Stephens commenced building his new house at
Tregonna; and in that and in a subsequent year proved unsuccessful at
a poll, and on a petition, for the representation of St. Ives. He died
in March 1794, leaving three sons, John Stephens, Rector of Ludgvan;
Samuel, to whom he devised a large portion of his estate; and
Augustus, all of whom have died in the present year (1834); also three
daughters, Anne, Maria, and Harriet. Mr. Samuel Stephens, the second
son, married Betty, sole daughter of Capt. Wallis, the discoverer of
Otaheite, and coheiress of the families of Hearle and Paynter. He
represented St. Ives in two Parliaments, and died February the 25th,
1834, leaving five sons, and one daughter, married to the Rev. Charles
William Davy.

Previously to the Act of Parliament of 1832, St. Ives sent two Members
to Parliament; and the right of voting rested in persons paying scot
and lot throughout the parish. It now sends one member in conjunction
with Lelant and Towednack. The present representative is Mr. James
Halse, probably related to the historian: this gentleman is among the
most enterprising and successful adventurers in mines of the present
day.

The situation of the town would seem to be most salubrious, and
perhaps it is so in ordinary times; but few places have suffered more
from occasional epidemics.

The Editor remembers to have heard dreadful traditionary accounts of
the plague in 1647. No market was kept in the town for a considerable
space of time; but instead of it, supplies were brought to the edge of
two streams of water at Polmanter and at Longstone Downs, where
provisions were deposited with their prices affixed, which the
inhabitants took away, leaving their money in the streams. It it said,
however, that the Stephens family having retired to a farm called
Aire, which they possessed just out of the town, and having there cut
off all communication with others, entirely escaped, although 535 died
in the course of one summer, out of a population which could not at
that period have exceeded treble the amount. In the spring of 1786, a
fever raged with great violence, to which the reverend Mr. Lane, then
lecturer, and Mrs. Lane fell victims within a few days of each other.

The whole inscription on the cup given by Sir Francis Basset is as
follows:

  If any discord ’twixt my friends arise
  Within the borough of beloved St. Ives,
  It is desired this my cup of love,
  To everie one a peace-maker may prove;
  Then am I blest to have given a legacie,
  So like my harte unto posteritie.
                        Francis Basset, A^o 1640.

The arms of the town are, Argent, an ivy bush overspreading the whole
field Proper, evidently in allusion to the name; but this bearing has
afforded an obvious joke throughout the neighbouring parishes at the
expense of the Mayor.

The church is unusually large and handsome, with a fourth aile at the
eastern end, and a lofty tower; and few prospects are equally
beautiful with that of the town and bay from the hill near Tregenna.

The parish feast is celebrated at the same time as that of Lelant the
mother church; and Lelant, Redruth, and Crowan, are said to honour St.
Eury by holding their feasts on the nearest Sunday to her day,
February 1st, but no trace of any such saint can be found.

  The parish measures 1524 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          5,560    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                         1,174    0    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {  2714   |   3281   |   3526   |   4776
    giving an increase of 76 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The north-eastern part of this parish is composed of compact and slaty
felspar rocks, like those of St. Just in Penwith; the other part is
situated on granite. Both these rocks are traversed by metalliferous
veins, which have been for many ages the objects of mining
speculations.




ST. JULYOT.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Lesnewith, and hath upon the north St.
Gennis, west St. George’s Channel, south Lesnewith, east Otterham. As
for the modern name, it is so called from its tutelar guardian and
patron thereof, St. Julius, Pope of Rome and Confessor. In Domesday
Tax, 20 William I. (1087), it was rated under the jurisdiction of
Lesnewith or Otterham. In the taxation of benefices made by the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester in Cornwall, 1294, ecclesia de
Sancta Juliot, in decanatu de Major Trigshire (id est, before Stratton
was dismembered from it) is rated xii_l._ Again, Capella de Sancta
Julyot, xxvi_s._ viii_d._; but where this latter Church or Chapel now
stands, I am wholly ignorant; for in Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, and
Valor Beneficiorum, both are forgotten or omitted; the patronage is in
Molesworth, and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax,
1696, 66_l._ 16_s._


TONKIN.

This parish is a donative, the patrons Sir John Molesworth and Mr.
Rawle. The name is from St. Juliet, a virgin saint and martyr.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Whitaker agrees in assigning to St. Juliet the honour of giving
her name to this parish.

There seems to be some confusion in Mr. Hals’ narrative between the
appropriations of the Rectory and of the Vicarage, which Mr. Whitaker
endeavours to explain in the following note.

     “Mr. Hals has confounded himself by the identity of names. The
     Rectory of St. Julyot is placed by the first Valor in the Deanery
     of Trig _Minor_, and the _Chapel_ of St. Julyot is placed by it;
     and by the second in that of Trig _Major_. The former too is
     rated so high as 12_l._, while the latter is only 26_s._ 8_d._
     even at a period so much later. The former therefore is the only
     large living of Trig Minor that is unnoticed in the first Valor,
     Lanteglos, correspondently valued in the second at 34_l._ 11_s._
     3_d._ And the latter is the present St. Julyot, not a Rectory,
     but a mere Chapel in the first Valor, a mere Curacy Parochial in
     the second, once appropriated to the Abbey of Tavistock, and
     therefore having only 15_s._ certified value at present, the old
     allocation settled upon it by the Abbey.”

Mr. Hals has given a very long history of Julius, Pope or Bishop of
Rome, from the year 343 to 358, which is omitted.

Nor is there anything worth relating in the history or legend of St.
Julyot. She is said to have suffered death, having been accused by a
violent and wicked person who had previously taken from her by force
some ample possessions. There is extant a sermon of St. Basil in
praise of this saint, who is commemorated in the Rituale Romanum on
the 30th of July.

The family of Rawle, settled for some time at Leskeard, are said to
have originated from Hennot, in this parish. They, together with
Molesworth of Pencarrow, are joint impropriators, and alternately
nominate the perpetual curate.

  St. Julyot measures 2276 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1784    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           143   18    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    199  |    208   |    263   |    271
    giving an increase of 36 per cent., in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. John Russell, instituted in 1810.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are nearly allied to dunstone, into which
they pass at Tresparret Downs; some of them, however, more nearly
resemble the dark-coloured pyritous rocks of Forrabury.




ST. JUST, IN ROSELAND.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north King’s
Road and other parts of the Sea of Falmouth Harbour, east Phillery,
south Gerans, west Anthony; the modern name of this parish and church
is taken from the name of the saint to whom the same is dedicated,
viz. St. Just; for in the Domesday Tax it was rated under the
jurisdiction of Egles-ros, now Philley, or Tregarada, now Tregare in
Gerance, both contiguous therewith. In the Inquisition of the Bishops
of Lincoln and Winchester into the value of Cornish Benefices, 1294,
ecclesia de Sancto Justo, in decanatu de Powdre, was rated at iiii_l._
vi_s._ viii_d._ This church was partly endowed by the Dean and Chapter
of Exon, who received an annuity out of the same of xxx_s._, as
appears from that Inquisition; and partly by the Prior and Convent of
St. Mary de Val, or Vale, contiguous therewith, and St. Mary de Plym,
its superior, who received annually out of it xiii_s._ iv_d._ In
Wolsey’s Inquisition it was valued at 37_l._ The patronage was
formerly in the Prior of St. Mary de Val, now Antony (in right of
their manor of St. Mary’s, now St. Maws), annexed since the
dissolution of that Priory, 26 Henry VIII., to the manor of Tolverne,
afterwards in Arundell of Tolverne, now Tredinham; the incumbent
Bedford. The parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696,
172_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._

In this parish, upon a cove or creek of Falmouth Harbour, stands the
borough of St. Mawes, also St. Mary’s, so called from the manor of
land on which it is situate, heretofore pertaining to the Canons
Regular of the Priory of St. Mary de Plym in Devon, both dedicated to
the blessed Virgin Mary, and thence from her denominated St. Mary’s.
It is the voke lands of two ancient manors, named Tolverne and
Bohurra, privileged time out of mind with the jurisdiction of court
leets, held before the Steward or Portreeve, who governs the same, and
is annually chosen by the majority of the homage or tenants of the
manor of Tolverne Court; the lords of which formerly were the Priors
aforesaid, afterwards Arundell of Tolverne, now Tredinham as
aforesaid. It sendeth two Members to sit in the Lower House of
Parliament, who are chosen or elected by the freeholders or freemen of
the said borough. It hath a weekly market, and an annual fair on
Friday next after Luke’s day; and giveth for its arms, a bend lozengy
of six pieces ermine, between a castle in the sinister chief and a
ship rigged without sails in the dexter.

The writ to remove an action at law depending in this Leet to a
Superior Court, and the precept for election of Members of Parliament,
must be thus directed: Præposito et Senescallo ville sue de St. Mawes
alias St. Mary’s in Com. Cornub. salutem.

At the north end of this borough, upon a well advanced promontory,
stands the Castle of St. Mawes, alias St. Mary’s, first built,
fortified, and supplied with a small garrison of soldiers, by King
Henry VIII. in his French wars, for defence of the harbour of
Falmouth, against invasion of enemies; having now about thirty cannon,
demy cannon, and culverins pertaining thereto (but scarcely so many
soldiers of war). The Captain and Keeper whereof hath from the King
54_l._ 15_s._; his Deputy 27_l._ 7_s._ 6_d._; three Gunners, in all
72_l._

After the dissolution of the Priory of St. Anthony, 26 Henry VIII.,
1535, this Castle and the land whereon it stands, together with the
government thereof, as I am informed, was given by that King to Sir
Robert Le Greice, Knight, an Arragonist or Spaniard, whose son, in
Queen Elizabeth’s reign, sold the inheritance thereof to Hanniball
Vyvyan, Esq. of Trelowarren, who thereupon was made Governor thereof;
as some say after his decease, Sir Francis Vyvyan, Knight, his son;
after his decease Sir Richard Vyvyan, Bart., his son; after his
decease Sir Vyell Vyvyan, Bart., who was so far imposed upon by John
Earl of Bath, by licence of King Charles II., as to sell the
inheritance of the lands whereon this Castle stands, to him for
500_l._; who forthwith transferred it over to Sir Joseph Tredinham,
Knight, who then became Governor thereof, but was displaced by King
William III., and the government thereof given to his Privy
Councellor, the Right Honourable Hugh Boscawen, Esq., now in
possession thereof at the writing of these lines.

There was a great controversy in Parliament, 4 James I., between
Cotterell and Legrice, about Legrice’s lands. See the Memoirs of
Parliament, page 68, and modus tenendi Parliamentum.

During the interregnum of Cromwell, Sir Richard Vyvyan, as a person
dissaffected to his government, was displaced from the gubernation of
this Castle, and one Captain Rouse put in his place, which gentleman,
as I have been informed, before the war broke out between King Charles
I. and his Parliament, was of such low fortune in the world that he
lived in a barn at Landrake, and lodged on straw, till he got a
commission to be a Captain in the Parliament Army under the Earl of
Essex, which brought him into money and credit; so that at length he
was posted the Commander or Governor of this Castle, who behaved
himself so very proud, grand, severe, and magisterial towards the
neighbouring gentlemen of the royal party, that it gave occasion to
John Trefusis, Esq., to make this short description of him in verse;
which the Cavalier party, when they met to drink the King’s health,
would commonly sing in derision of the Governor, and called it their
passado, viz.:

  In wealth Rouse abounds;
  He keepeth his hounds,
  Full fourteen couple and more.
  When he lived in a house
  With an owl and a mouse,
  Oh! they say he was wondrous poor.――Oh! they say.

Part of this barn aforesaid, tempore William III., as I am informed,
was converted to a dwelling house, the other part was made a
Presbyterian meeting-house, by Mr. Robert Rouse of Wootton, son of the
gentleman before mentioned, who with his family commonly on Sundays
met there with great numbers of people of that profession, to hear the
predicaments of their Priest. This Mr. Robert Rouse married Harrington
of Somersetshire, and resided there during his father, the Governor,
Rouse’s life, with his wife, during which stay there he had by her one
or two sons; and after his father’s death, he came down to Wootton in
this county.

As the Captain or Keeper of St. Mawes Castle hath a salary as
aforesaid, so the Governor of its opposite Castle of Pendenis, hath
yearly from the Crown 182_l._ 10_s._; his Lieutenant-Governor 73_l._;
the Master Gunner 36_l._; and two other Gunners 36_l._ each; and the
like payments are made to the Governor and Lieutenant-Governor and
Gunners of Scilly Castle and Islands.


TONKIN.

The patronage of this parish is in Sir Joseph Tredenham, in right of
his manor of Tolvern.

A great part of this parish is included in the manor of Tolvern, but
as the capital place is in Philly I shall there treat of it.

Treveres; the town in the ways or roads, veres being the plural of ver
or vere, a road, way or lane.

This place has been for several generations, by lease from the
Arundells and the succeeding lords of Tolvern, the seat of the Jacks,
the last of whom, Richard Jack, Esq. dying without issue, left this
estate to his sister’s only daughter, heiress of William Hooker, of
Trelisick, in St. Ewe, Esq. and married to John Pomeray, Clerk.

Near this place lies Rosecossa, the woody valley, which I am told was
formerly the seat of Sir John Rosecossa, who had here a large house
and a chapel, but lately demolished. He left two daughters
coheiresses, married to Trefry and Woollcumbe. This estate, with
another called Tolcarne, that is the stone with a hole bored in it,
have descended to Roger Woollcumbe, of Langford Hill, Esq. the present
possessor of both.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals has given a long history of St. Just, the companion of St.
Austin, and his successor in the See of Canterbury, all of which is
omitted. The parish is supposed to be under the patronage of St. Just,
or Justus Archbishop of Lyons, about the year 350. This Saint, already
a Bishop, began his career towards beatitude, by assisting St. Ambrose
in his furious hostility against the Arians, and completed it by
retiring into the deserts of Egypt, to prepare himself for the society
of superior beings, through the favour of Him who is the author of all
wisdom, of all knowledge, and of all benevolence, to be obtained by
discarding or stupefying in solitude every kind affection, and every
faculty of intelligence bestowed on him by the Almighty.

He is commemorated in the Roman Calendar on the second of September.

St. Mawes and its castle are by far the objects of greatest curiosity
in this parish.

The shelter afforded for boats must at all times have rendered this
place a resort of fishermen, but it acquired more importance and a
name by the residence of St. Mawes, who seems to have come from
Ireland with the other missionaries.

Accounts respecting him are extremely various. Some assimilate his
history to that of St. Just, stating that he attained the episcopal
dignity, and then, in compliance with the taste of that age, retired
to an ascetic solitude; other legends represent him as a schoolmaster,
and in early paintings he may be seen with the well-known emblem of
scholastic authority in his hand.

The castle at St. Mawes was undoubtedly built by King Henry VIII. but
a tradition universally believed in Cornwall is much less certain.

It is said that the King came to view the situation of his two
projected castles of St. Mawes and Pendennis; that he passed two
nights at Tolvorn, then a seat of the Arundells; and that he crossed
the river from thence to Feock, at a passage that has ever since gone
by his name. There is not, however, any trace of this journey to be
found in histories of the times, nor in any public document.

The privilege of sending Members to Parliament was given to this
village by Queen Elizabeth, in pursuance, probably, of the Tudor
policy noticed under Michell; and if the creation of a close borough
were the object really intended, it proved invariably successful up to
the general disfranchisement of 1832.

This right of sending Members to Parliament, accompanied by the
pageantry of maces and sergeants-at-arms, and combined with various
personal advantages, could not fail of exciting feelings of envy and
ridicule. In this instance the village of St. Mawes, extending in a
single line of houses in the direction of the beach, has readily
presented a topic, which was, to inquire whether the new mayor lived
on the same side of the street as his predecessor.

Corrack Road, the best anchorage for large vessels in all Falmouth
harbour, lies off this parish, called by Mr. Hals King Road, but the
popular appellation is St. Just, or Sainteast, Pool.

Mr. Lysons gives the following inscriptions, said to have been written
by Leland, and cut in the castle walls.

“Henricus, Octavus Rex Angliæ, Franciæ, et Hiberniæ invictissimus, me
posuit præsidium reipublicæ, terrorem hostibus.

  Imperio Henrici naves submittite vela,
  Semper honos, Henrice, tuus laudesque manebunt;
  Edwardus famâ referat factisque parentem,
  Gaudeat, Edwardo duce nunc, Cornubia felix.
  Semper vivat Aiâ Regis Henrici Octavi, qui
  anno XXXIVᵒ sui regni hoc fieri fecit.
  Honora Henricum Octavum Angliæ, Franciæ, et
    Hiberniæ Regem excellentissimum.”

The advowson of this parish has passed by succession from Tredinham,
through Schobells, to Hawkins. The present incumbent is Edward Rodd,
D.D. of Trebartha, late Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford, and Proctor
of the University in 1802.

  St. Just in Roseland measures 2340 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
     returned to Parliament in 1815          4714    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           817    8    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              { 1416    |  1639    |  1648    |  1558
    giving an increase of 10 per cent. in 30 years; there being
      a decrease of 90 in the last 10 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish, which forms the eastern shore of Falmouth harbour, is
composed of the same rocks as the adjoining parishes of Filley,
Gersons, and St. Anthony.




ST. JUST, NEAR PENZANCE.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the north-east
Morsa, west St. George’s Channel and Sennan, east Saneret, south
Buryan. For the modern name, it is taken from the tutelar guardian to
whom this church is dedicated, viz. St. Just the Roman, first Bishop
of Rochester, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this district passed in tax, either
under the jurisdiction of Buryan or Alverton. In the taxation of
benefices made by the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the
value of Cornish Benefices, 1294, ecclesia Sancti Justi in decanatu de
Penwith is rated viii_l._; in Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, 11_l._
11_s._ 0½_d._; the patronage in the Crown; the incumbent Millet; the
rectory in possession of Borlase, and the parish rated to the 4_s._
per pound Land Tax, 1696, by the name of St. Just, 133_l._ 7_s._;
which name is derived from the Latin words jus, justus, right, just,
lawful, righteous, well-meaning, upright.

At Pen-dene, or Pen-dayn, in this parish, is the dwelling of John
Borlase, Esq. Commissioner for the Peace, who married Lydia Harris, of
Kenegye, and giveth the same arms as the Borlases of Borlase in St.
Wenn and Newland; this gentleman’s father greatly advanced his wealth
by tin adventures, and is descended from the Borlases of Sythney, as I
am informed.

Bray in this parish, situate on the Irish sea coast, gave name and
original to an old family of gentlemen surnamed de Bray who by the
tenure of knight service, held in this place two parts of a knight’s
fee of land, 3 Henry IV. Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 39.

I take the Lord Bray of Hampshire to be descended from this family.
This place is now in the possession of that well-known quaker, John
Ellis, Esq.

On the south side of this parish, upon a lofty hill, stands Chapel
Carne Bray, that is to say Bray’s spar-stone Chapel, and suitable to
its name it is situate upon the top of the most astonishing burrow or
tumulus of Carnes, or spar stones, that ever my eyes beheld;
artificially laid together perhaps upon the bodies of human creatures,
interred upon the mountain before the fifth century; on the top of
which burrow of stones, which is about fifteen feet high from the
ground, stands the chapel itself; which riseth about ten feet higher,
well built with moor-stone and lime, with a window in the east, and a
durns, or door, on the south of the same stones; the roof all well
covered or arched over with large flat moor-stones, wrought with the
hammer and strongly fastened together. The chapel being about ten feet
broad and about fourteen feet long (as that on Roach Rock) on the
outside; and round this chapel may be seen, the downfalls of many
sparstone-stairs and walks, by which heretofore the people ascended to
this chapel, and diverted themselves with a full prospect of the
contiguous country by sea and land――St. George’s Channel, the British
Ocean, and the Atlantic Sea towards the Scilly Islands, of which from
hence in fair weather you may have a full view; which lands of Scilly
seem to stand in equal height with this chapel, though the ground
towards the Land’s End, in St. Leucan and St. Lennan, on the sea-shore
towards it, are at least eighty fathoms lower, or under it, as is the
sea itself, betwixt that and the Scilly Islands. Such another chapel
as this, though not built upon a burrow of stones, is to be seen on
Mountague Hill, in Somersetshire, and dedicated to St. Michael the
Archangel, for half a mile ascended up the hill upon stone stairs,
embowed or arched over head right artificially. (See also Camden in
Somerset.) Thus it appears that this tribe of Bray were heretofore men
of great wealth, fame, and renown in those parts; since their name
adheres not only to two local places in this parish, but divers
others, as Castle Carne Bray in Luggan, Bray in Morvall, and many
other places.

In this parish also was formerly St. Ewny’s Chapel, now dilapidated;
see Redruth and Lelant for more of this St. Ewny.

Those spar-stone monuments of Carne Bray Castle, and Chapel Carne Bray
aforesaid, will I suppose perpetuate the name and memory of those
Brays till the final consummation of all things, as aforesaid. Bray,
in Battle Abbey Roll, is recorded to have come into England with
William the Conqueror; but by the names of those local places and the
fabrics aforesaid, it is probable they were here long before.

In this parish is a large flat stone, on which, as tradition says,
seven Saxon Kings at one time and day, dined thereon, at such time as
they came into Cornwall to see the Land’s End thereof, and of Great
Britain; which Kings are said to have been: 1. Ethelbert, 5th King of
Kent; 2. Cissa, 2nd King of the South Saxons; 3. Kingills, 6th King of
the West Saxons; 4. Sebert, 3d King of the East Saxons; 5. Ethelfred,
7th King of the Northumbers; 6. Penda, 5th King of the Mercians; and
7. Sigebert, 5th King of the East Angles; who all flourished about the
year 600, and were all crowned heads, as Samuel Daniell in his
Chronicle tells us.[7]


TONKIN

Has not any thing in addition to what is stated by Mr. Hals, except a
description of Mayne Scriffer, or the “inscribed stone,” which he ends
by saying is really not in this parish, but in Madders, where he
purposes to give a more full account of it.


THE EDITOR.

Pendeen claims the first attention of any place in this parish. It was
for some ages the residences of the Borlases, since removed to Castle
Horneck, near Penzance. At Pendeen resided in the early part of his
life Mr. John Borlase, sometime member for St. Ives. Here were born
his two sons the Rev. Walter Borlase, LL.D. Vice Warden of the
Stannaries; and the Rev. William Borlase, LL.D. by diploma from the
university of Oxford, the justly celebrated writer of the Antiquities
and of the Natural History of Cornwall.

Pendeen exhibits an excellent specimen of the large but comfortless
houses, inhabited by gentlemen two centuries ago.

Near the house may be seen one of those very ancient excavations
called vaus or faus. See Borlase’s Antiquities, p. 293, 2d edit. 1769.
They are conjectured to have been made for places of refuge in times
when predatory descents on the coast were of frequent occurrence, and
always causes of alarm. Yet the entrance could not be concealed, and
the five kings of the Amorites had left an example, confirmed at no
remote period by the cruel fate of a northern clan, proving the utter
insecurity of such a retreat.

On the sea-shore below the house is a small cove, where boats and nets
are kept for fishing; but so small is the shelter on this iron-bound
coast, that the boats are drawn up by ropes or chains, and kept
suspended during the winter, on the sloping surface of a steep cliff.

Some miles westward of Pendeen, and near the sea, is Botallock, the
seat of the Usticks; one among the many families that resided for
centuries in this remote peninsula, moderately endowed with gifts of
fortune, but possessed of the honour and feelings of gentlemen.

This parish has been productive of tin from the most early periods;
and Botallock would have elevated its proprietors in the scale of
wealth, but times and manners had changed, so that the last Mr. Ustick
of that place having spent his estate, and then got it redeemed by a
productive mine, sold it at last to Admiral Boscawen, to whose
grandson the property now belongs. The veins or lodes of tin having
been wrought within the last fifty years to depths unattainable before
the introduction of improved steam-engines, copper has, in very many
instances, been found under the tin; and this has occurred at
Botallock, where situated on the edge of a cliff, the workings with
the steam-engines, whims, &c. present a spectacle more unique and more
imposing than any other in Cornwall.

Further from the shore is Busvargus, the seat of an ancient family of
the same name, the heiress of which was the mother of the Rev.
Jonathan Toup, whose eminence as a scholar has been noticed under St.
Ives. He died without issue in 1785; and the estate of Busvargus,
having been settled on the children of his half-sister, is now the
property of his niece, Mrs. Nicholas of Looe, the present
representative of the Busvargus family.

The families of most distinction in latter times, inhabitants of St.
Just, were Allan and Moddern, but both names are now extinct.

The great tithes appertained to the monastery of Glaseney, in Penryn.
They now belong to Borlase.

The vicarage is in the presentation of the crown, and was held for
many years by Doctor William Borlase, the historian.

And here perhaps the Editor may be allowed to mention the name of one
whom he esteemed and admired, although his connection with Cornwall
was so little permanent as to consist only of his serving the curacy
of this parish.

The Reverend John Smyth, Fellow of Pembroke College, Oxford, received
his title for deacon’s orders from Doctor William Borlase, as vicar of
St. Just, where he remained about six or seven years, till Cornwall
lost one of its greatest ornaments.

Leaving St. Just, after Doctor Borlase’s decease, he became the friend
and assistant of the Reverend Sir Richard Kaye, Dean of Lincoln, and
through his recommendation made the tour of Europe with Mr. Langley, a
gentleman of Yorkshire. He then went back to College, and on a vacancy
became tutor, and succeeded to the Headship; returning from a visit to
Penzance, in 1809, he died in consequence of some local complaint at
Exeter, where a monument has been placed to his memory in the
Cathedral Church, with the following inscription:

  Juxta conditur
  Joannes Smyth, S. T. P.
  Magister Collegii Pembrochiæ
  apud Oxonienses,
  Qui Academiam remeans, hac in Urbe,
  vi morbi grassantis, cito abreptus est,
  die 19 Octobris, A.D. 1809, ætatis suæ 66.
  Grata recordatione ejus in Collegiam beneficentiæ,
  in amicos comitatis et benevolentiæ,
  imo in omnes Φιλανθρωπιας,
  hoc marmor posuêre
  Successor ejus et Socii.

There is also a cenotaph in the Cathedral at Gloucester, a prebend of
which church is annexed to the mastership of Pembroke College, by the
liberality of Queen Anne.

Few men were ever more universally esteemed, or were more deserving of
being so. His abilities and learning commanded respect; kindness,
generosity, and benevolence endeared him to every friend; whilst good
nature and convivial manners made him the favorite of each casual
acquaintance.

To him the Editor is indebted for his good fortune in being himself a
member of Pembroke College.

The parish feast is celebrated on the Sunday nearest to All Saints,
November the first; but the church is known to claim for its patron
St. Just, the companion of St. Austin, Bishop of Rochester, and
afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury. Little is handed down to
posterity of St. Just, but that little is entirely to his praise; at
the command of Pope Gregory the Great, he undertook the perilous but
successful service of converting the English Saxons; he attained the
highest ecclesiastical dignity from the suffrages of those who had
been brought by the labours of St. Austin and of his followers, within
the pale of the church; and he obtained deserved commendation from
Pope Boniface, either the third or fourth, who with one intermediate
Pope, were the successors of St. Gregory, when the apostolic
confirmation of his appointment to the metropolitan see was given, and
himself honoured by the investure of a pall. He is stated in the
Rubrics to have died on the 10th of November in the year 627.

Nothing seems to be more obvious, or to be more congenial to the human
mind, than an annual celebration of particular events. Nature has
completed in twelve months the most distinctly marked of her cycles.
The seasons are renewed in the same order; and, if experience did not
soon convince us of the contrary, we might be induced to think that
our own existence in this world was destined to tread the same
perpetual round.

Birth-days appear to have been celebrated in honour of living persons
from times the most remote, either by nations, provinces, or private
families, in proportion as their claims to attention were more or less
wide. After the decease of those who have been supposed to confer
benefits on mankind, “Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo,” and
more especially of those to whom nations owed their spiritual light
and hopes, the days of such persons leaving this scene of trial, of
sorrow, of anxiety, and of disappointment, to obtain their reward in
Heaven, became epochs for uniting religious observance with joy and
gladness. Churches were, therefore, dedicated to their memories and
festivals instituted; but in England at least this instinctive
propensity received the aid of a policy similar to that which, in
still earlier periods, had fixed the Christian festivals on the very
days previously occupied by the celebration of ancient superstition.
Bede has preserved the following letter from Pope Gregory to St.
Mellitus, who led a second band of missionaries into England, after
the successful preaching of St. Austin, and became the first Bishop of
London, where he is said to have founded the two Cathedrals, and
finally to have attained the Archbishopric of Canterbury.

Historiæ Ecclesiasticæ Gentis Anglorum Libri Quinque, autore Sancto et
venerabili Baeda. Lib. 2, ch. 30.

Exemplar Epistolæ quam Mellito Abbati Britanniam pergenti misit
Sanctus Gregorius.

Abeuntaibus autem præfatis legatariis misit post eos beatus Pater
Gregorius litteras memoratu dignas, in quibus apertè quàm studiosè
erga salvationem nostræ gentis invigilaverit ostendit, ita scribens:

Dilectissimo filio Mellito Abbati GREGORIUS Servus Servorum Dei.

Post discessum congregationis nostræ, quæ tecum est, valde sumus
suspensi redditi, quia nihil de prosperitate vestri itineris audisse
nos contigit. Cum ergo Deus Omnipotens vos ad reverendissimum virum,
Fratrem nostrum Augustinum Episcopum perduxerit, dicite ei quod diu
mecum de causa Anglorum cogitans tractavi; videlicet quia Fana
Idolorum destrui in eadem gente minime debeant, sed ipsa quæ in eis
sunt Idola destruantur; Aqua benedicta fiat; in eisdem Fanis
aspergatur; Altaria construantur; Reliquiæ ponantur, quia, si Fana
eadem bene constructa sunt, necesse est ut a cultu Dæmonum in obsequio
Veri Dei debeant commutari, ut dum gens ipsa eadem Fana sua non videt
destrui, de corde errorem deponat, et Deum Verum cognoscens ac
adorans, ad loca quæ consuevit familiariùs concurrat. _Et quia boves
solent in sacrificio Dæmonum multos occidere, debet eis etiam, hac de
re, aliqua sollemnitas immutari; ut Die Dedicationis, vel Natilitii
sanctorum Martyrum, quorum illic Reliquiæ ponuntur, Tabernacula sibi,
circa easdem Ecclesias, quæ ex Fanis commutatæ sunt, de ramis arborum
faciant, et Religiosis convivis sollemnitatem celebrant._ Nec Diabolo
jam animalia immolent; et, ad laudem Dei, in esu suo animalia
occidant, et Donatori omnium de satietate sua gratias referant; ut dum
eis aliqua exteriùs gaudia reservantur, ad interiora gaudia consentire
faciliùs valeant. Nam duris mentibus simul omnia abscindere
impossibile esse non dubium est; quia et is qui summum locum ascendere
nititur gradibus vel passibus, non autem saltibus elevatur; sic
Israelitico populo in Ægypto Dominus re quidem innotuit; sed tamen eis
sacrificiorum usus, quæ Diabolo solebat exhibere, in cultu proprio
reservavit, et eis in suo sacrificio animalia immolare præciperet,
quatenus cor mutantes, aliud de sacrificio amitterent, aliud
retinerent; ut etsi ipsa assent animalia quæ efferare consueverant,
vero tamen Deo hæc et non Idolis immolantes jam sacrificia ipsa non
essent.

Hæc igitur dilectionem tuam prædicto Fratri necesse est dicere, ut
ipse in præsenti illic positus perpendet, qualiter omnia debeat
dispensare.

Deus te incolumem custodiat, dilectissime Fili! Data die decima quinta
kalendarum Juliarum, imperante Domino nostro Mauricio Tiberio piissimo
Augusto, anno decimo novo; post consulatum ejusdem Domini anno decimo
octavo; Indictione quarta. A. D. 601.

It may be presumed that the Jesuit missionaries to China and to
Paraguay were not unacquainted with this letter from the Pope.

  St. Just in Penwith measures 6,984 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           7776    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           817    8    0
  Population,  }in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               }   2779  |    3057  |    3666  |    4667
    giving an increase of 68 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. John Buller, presented by the Lord
    Chancellor in 1825.
  This parish is called St. Juest as a distinction from the
    name of the parish in Roseland pronounced St. Jeast.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish, with the exception of a narrow band of slate which skirts
the coast from Pendeen Cove to Cape Cornwall, is situated entirely on
granite. It has been long celebrated for its mines, which generally
are placed on or near to the junction of the granite and the slate;
and in consequence of the narrow limits of the latter rock, their
workings often extend under the sea. Botallack mine is a noted
instance of this description; and its steam engine and machinery,
perched on the side of a steep rocky cliff, present one of the most
picturesque objects in the country. St. Just has afforded specimens of
by far the greater number of British minerals. Its slate has a basis
of compact felspar, and exhibits many interesting varieties of this
rock; but the most rare is that which abounds with disseminated
garnets at Botallack. The principal lodes of this parish exhibit some
peculiarities in their direction, and the little coves are generally
covered with beds of diluvium, some of which are composed of large
granitic pebbles and boulders, which appear to have once formed a
beach, although at present they are elevated above high-water mark.
St. Just abounds with so many interesting objects as to make it
impossible to enumerate them in these short notices. Ample details may
be found of all these productions in the Transactions of the
Geological Society of Cornwall.


     [7] This is said by modern tradition to have happened at
     Mean, in the adjacent parish of Sannen. _Edit._




ST. KEYNE.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of West, and hath upon the east Leskeard and
the Loo river, south Dulo, west Lanreth, north St. Pynnock; at the
time of the Norman Conquest this district passed under the
jurisdiction of Leskeard, and so in the Domesday Tax as part thereof.
In the Inquisition into the value of Cornish benefices made by the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294, ecclesia de Kayne in decanatu
de Westwellshire was rated xx_l._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, 5_l._
18_s._ 6_d._ The patronage in ――――; the Incumbent Doweringe; and the
parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 53_l._ 16_s._ by
the name of St. Kain.

The presidual guardian of this church is one of those two holy women
mentioned by writers as famous for their piety and supernatural facts;
the one of the British blood, the other of Saxon race. That of the
British is St. Kayne, daughter of Braghan, king and builder of the
town of Brecknock in Wales, who flourished about the year 500; the
which King Braghan had issue also twenty-three other daughters, all
for the like reasons aforesaid entered into the catalogue or calendar
of saints; and also two sons, St. Canock and St. Caddock, to whose
honour and memory a chapel in Padstow parish was erected; and still,
though disused from divine service, bearing his name. The other St.
Kayne was born about the seventh century, upon the river Avon in
Somersetshire, at a place which after her decease sprung up a town,
still flourishing in fame and wealth, from her denominated Kainsham,
i. e. Kain’s house, home, habitation, or dwelling. She is famous
amongst agonal writers for miracle working, particularly for turning
serpents into stones wheresoever she saw them, so that they had not
power either to hurt man or beast; a woman very much wanted now in
Cornwall, where adders or serpents abound to the great hurt of man and
beast.

She is also highly praised by John Capgrave in his book of the English
Saints, for her purity, piety, and chastity.

To one of these two women is also dedicated the vicarage church of
Cainham, in Holderness hundred in York; as also Caynham vicarage
church in Ludlow hundred in Salop.

In this parish at ―――― lived some of the Coplestons of Colbrook in
Devon, as I take it; which place descended to them by some of the
heirs of Flemmen, Berkley, Turvey, Courtney, Bonvill, Pawlet,
Chichester, Bridges, Graas, Hawley, Huish, Wiedbury, Fitzwalter, or
some others, which they married with successively; and thereby
obtained such a mighty estate in Cornwall and Devon that they were
generally distinguished by the name of the “great Coplestons.” But,
alas! maugre all their great riches and wealth, the last John Great
Coplestone, tempore Elizabeth, for killing his natural son and godson
in discontent, was indicted at the assizes at Exeter, tried and found
guilty of wilful murder, and sentenced to death for the same; and lay
in gaol till he sold thirteen manors of land in Cornwall to obtain a
reprieve or pardon; and left of legal issue only one son, named John,
who had issue only two daughters that became his heirs; married to
Bamphield and Elford, in whom the estate, name, and blood of those
Coplestons is terminated, who gave for their arms, Argent, a chevron
Gules, between three leopards’ faces Azure. These gentlemen were
hereditary esquires of the white spur, who, together with the
Champernowns and the Carmenows, possessed and enjoyed the profits of
their private estates in Devon and Cornwall, to that great degree, in
former ages, that the like great riches was not then to be found in
any other family for value in those counties, though now I know not of
any lands in Cornwall remaining in those tribes, or any of those names
now extant there.


TONKIN.

Camden, in Somersetshire, mentions Keine as a devout British Virgin,
whom many of the last age, through an over credulous temper, believed
to have changed serpents into stones, because they find sometimes in
quarries some such little miracles of sporting nature. She is said to
have been born on the banks of the river Avon in that county, at the
place where after her decease sprung up a town, from her denominated
Keynesham. She is famous among the agonal writers for her purity,
piety, and charity, as also for many miracles, particularly for
turning serpents into stones.

There was one other St. Keyne famous among the Britains of Wales,
daughter to Brechanus, King, and namer of Brecknock Town. He had
twenty-four daughters and two sons, all Saints.

It is possible, however, that both these St. Keynes may be one and the
same.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons says, that the ancient name of this parish was Lametton,
and that the manor still exists.

This manor he further states was the property of Sir Robert Tresilian,
Lord Chief Justice of the King’s Bench, attainted in the reign of King
Richard the Second, by whom this portion of his property was bestowed
on John Hawley, of Dartmouth, supposed to have married a daughter of
the Chief Justice. His daughter and heiress brought it to the
Coplestones.

In the reign of James the First it belonged to the Harrisons of Mount
Radford in Devonshire, and from them it passed by marriage to the
Rashleighs.

Mr. William Rashleigh, of Menabilly, is now the proprietor of the
whole or nearly the whole of this parish, and in it of the celebrated
well, which Mr. Carew notices in the following manner, p. 305, Lord
Dunstanville’s edit.

“Next I will relate to you another of the Cornish natural wonders,
viz. Saint Keyne’s Well; but lest you make wonder, first at the Saint
before you notice the well, you must understand that this was not
Kayne the Manqueller, but one of a gentler spirit and milder sex, to
wit, a woman. He who caused the spring to be pictured added this rhyme
for an explanation:

  In name, in shape, in quality,
    This Well is very quaint;
  The name to lot of Kayne befell,
    No over holy Saint.

  The shape, four trees of divers kind,
    Withy, oak, elm, and ash,
  Make with their roots an arched roof,
    Whose floor this spring doth wash.

  The quality, that man or wife,
    Whose chance or choice attains,
  First of this sacred stream to drink,
    Thereby the mastery gains.”

Mr. Tonkin quotes this passage from Carew, and adds:

     “Did it retain this wondrous quality, as it does to this day
     the shape, I believe there would be to it a greater resort
     of both sexes than either to Bath or Tunbridge; for who
     would not be fond of attaining this longed-for sovereignty?”
     And Mr. Tonkin adds further, “since the writing of this the
     trees were blown down by a violent storm; and in their place
     Mr. Rashleigh, in whose land it is, has planted two oaks, an
     ash, and an elm, which thrive very well; but the wonderful
     arch is destroyed.”

For a most interesting account of St. Keyne’s Well, and of all that
portion of Cornwall, the reader is referred to Mr. Bond’s
“Topographical and Historical Sketches of East and West Looe, and of
the Neighbourhood,” 1 vol. 8vo. 1823, printed by John Nichols and Son,
No. 25, Parliament Street, Westminster.

Mr. Bond says that the trees were blown down by the great storm of
November 1703, and that Mr. Philip Rashleigh, who succeeded his father
in the property about that time, planted soon afterwards the trees
which have now acquired their full growth, and probably equalled those
which stood there before them.

Mr. Bond has also printed the beautiful as well as humorous lines
composed by Mr. Southey, and referred to other verses on the same
subject in the Gentleman’s Magazine for June 1822, vol. XCII. i. p.
526.

Mr. Southey’s lines cannot be too frequently reprinted.


  SAINT KEYNE’S WELL.

  BY ROBERT SOUTHEY.

  (_From Carew’s History of Cornwall._)

  A well there is in the West Country,
     And a clearer one never was seen;
  There is not a Wife in the West Country,
     But has heard of the Well of St. Keyne.

  An oak and an elm tree stand behind,
     And beside does an ash-tree grow;
  And a willow, from the bank above,
     Droops to the water below.

  A trav’ller came to the Well of St. Keyne;
     Pleasant it was to his eye,
  For from cock-crowing he had travelling been,
     And there was not a cloud in the sky.

  He drank of the water so cool and clear,
     For thirsty and hot was he;
  And he sat down upon a bank
     All under the willow tree.

  There came a man from the neighbouring town,
     At the Well to fill his pail;
  So on the well side he rested it,
     And bade the stranger hail.

  “Now art thou a bachelor, stranger?” quoth he,
    “For if thou hast a wife,
  The happiest draught thou hast drank to-day
     That ever thou didst in thy life.

  “Or has your good woman, if one you have,
     In Cornwall ever been?
  For, and if she have, I’ll venture my life
     She has drank of the Well of St. Keyne.”

  “I left a good woman who never was here,”
     The stranger he made reply,
  “But that my draught should be better for that,
     I pray you answer me why.”

  “St. Keyne,” quoth the countryman, “many a time
     Drank of this crystal Well;
  And before the angel summon’d her hence,
     She laid on the water a spell:――

  “If the husband of this gifted Well
     Shall drink before his wife
  A happy man thenceforth is he,
     For he shall be master for life.

  “But if the wife should drink of it first,
     God help the husband then!”――
  _The stranger stoopt to the Well of St Keyne,
     And he drank of the water again!!_

  “You drank of the Well, I warrant, betime?”
     He to the countryman said;
  But the countryman smiled, as the stranger spoke,
     And sheepishly shook his head.

  “I hasten’d, as soon as the wedding was done,
     And left my wife in the porch;
  But i’ faith! she had been wiser than me,――
     For she took a bottle to church.”

It is almost unnecessary to observe, that the stones said to originate
from serpents petrified at the intercession of St. Keyne or St. Kenna,
and supposed by Mr. Tonkin, according to the philosophy of his day, to
be _Lusus Naturæ_, are the shells of extinct Nautili, called Cornua
Ammonis, from their resemblance to the horns sculptured on the statues
of Jupiter Ammon, found in abundance throughout the neighbourhood of
Kainsham, and in most of the formations intermediate between the iron
sand and red marle.

Transforming serpents into stone, seems to have been an achievement as
appropriate to Saints as was the encountering of dragons to knights
errant. St. Hilda cleared her favourite Island from these venomous
reptiles; and St. Patrick, more powerfully gifted, swept them from the
whole of Ireland at once.

It was at last observed, with no small degree of wonder, that those
metamorphosed snakes invariably wanted a head, and the times of
fabricating legends having passed by, this phenomenon never received a
solution from the cloister.

St. Brechan, the British Saint and King, the happy father of
twenty-six children, all sainted like himself, is represented in the
second plate of St. Neot’s Church, in what is called the Young Women’s
Window, displaying these twenty-six Saints, small in stature, within a
fold of his kingly robe.

  This parish measures 769 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          1,017    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831,                           68   12    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {  139    |   157    |   153    |   201
    giving an increase of 44½ per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This little parish is situated entirely on rocks of the calcareous
series, like those of Dulo, one of the adjacent parishes.




KEY, OR KEA.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north Kenwyn
and Truro, and the sea channel thereof, south the Vale River and sea,
west Feock. As for the modern name Keye, it signifies in British a
hedge or mound, against sea or land, as sepes in Latin; from whence we
have our English words key or keys, wharfs for exportation and
importation of goods and merchandize over seas; no improper
appellation to the circumstances of this place, where are several of
that sort. It was taxed in the Domesday Book, 20 William I., 1087, by
the name of Landegey, (and from thence the manor of Lan-digge in this
parish, contiguous therewith, and surrounding the same, is
denominated; now corrupted to Lansagey, alias Keye.) From whence it is
plainly evident that before the Norman Conquest here was an endowed
rectory church that received tithes or tenths, of the profits of the
earth, predial or otherwise, towards the maintenance of the worship
and service of God, and doubtless invested with that benefit by the
Bishop of Bodmin or Cornwall, before that was united to Kirton and
Exeter.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the
value of Cornish Benefices, 1294, ecclesia de Landigh in decanatu de
Powdre was rated viii_l._ vi_s._ viii_d._ Vicar ejusdem xx_s._ In the
grant of fifteenths, granted by the clergy to the King, the 24th Henry
VI., 1447, the parish and church of Landege was rated £2. 7_s._,
Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 90. In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521,
Landegge was then rated together with Kenwyn, £16.; the patronage
formerly in the Bishop of Cornwall that endowed them, now the Bishop
of Exeter; the late incumbent Mitchell, now Borlase; and the parish
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, £171. 8_s._

Nansa-Vallan, in this parish, is the dwelling of Charles Boscawen,
Esq. Barrister-at-Law, second brother to the Right Honourable Hugh
Boscawen, of Tregothnan, Esq. who for many years hath retired himself
in this place in great esteem and respect of all that know him; doing
good to all those that, for his counsel, hospitality, friendship, or
charity, make addresses unto him; though he hath hitherto lived a
bachelor’s life, and whilst he lives I suppose ever will, with a kind
of abhorrence of women and marriage. I take this place either to be
part of or the voke lands of the manor of Blanchland, i. e. white
land, formerly the lands of Albalanda, now Boscawen’s of Tregothnan,
the waste lands of which lordship is not only abounding in tin and tin
mines, but for about twenty years last past hath yielded its owner
about twenty thousand pounds out of its coppermines, though the waste
or down lands in which it is found, is in many places scarce worth
eighteen pence per acre.

Guddarne in this parish, part of Blanchland manor, by lease is the
dwelling of Reginald Bauden, Gent. that married Pendarves, his father
Paynter, his grandfather Trewoolla.

In this place of Guddarne, in my youth, I was showed by Mr. Bauden a
brass or iron crock, containing about eight gallons; wherein, as he
said, his father found by virtue of a dream of one Hendra, under Key
Cross, in a tempestuous night of wind, thunder, lightning, and rain,
so vast a quantity of gold and silver as not only advanced him from
the rank of rack-renter to that of a freeholder, but from the
distinction of a plebeian to that of a gentleman.

Kelleho, Kellyow, Killeyow, synonymous words in this parish, id est
Hazell Copps, a place it seems heretofore notable for those sort of
nut trees called hazells, one of the sweetest and best sorts of nuts
this island affordeth, if left to grow full ripe and well saved. This
place is the dwelling of John Hawes, Esq. that married Sprye, his
father Vosper, and giveth for his arms, Azure, a fess wavy between
three lions passant Or.

Trelogas, in this parish, is the dwelling of Robert White, Gent. that
married Philips, of Poughill.

From this family was descended Mr. John White, linendraper in London,
who having got much money by trading in tin, settled lands of ten
pounds per annum beyond reprizes for ever, to be divided into four
equal parts, between the poor inhabitants of the four ancient coinage
towns in Cornwall, viz. Leskeard, Lestwithell, Truro, and Helston; to
be distributed by the ministers and churchwardens of those churches on
St. John’s day yearly; the remainder, being forty shillings, to be
divided into four equal parts between the four ministers of those
churches, who on that day in their respective churches annually are to
preach an anniversary sermon in remembrance of him for ever, of which
elsewhere (see Truro.)

In this parish of Kea on the open downs, by the highway or street, are
situate the four burrows, i. e. the four sepulchres, tumuli, or
graves, after the British-Roman manner, to put those travellers that
passed by in mind of mortality and death; one of them is called Burrow
Bel-les, i. e. the far off, remote, broad or large burrow or
sepulchre, (viz. on the confines of this parish) and suitable to its
other names it is one of the broadest or largest burrows in those
parts; into which some tinners, temp. William III. in hopes of finding
money, pierced a hole or adit into the centre thereof, where, though
they missed their expectations they found in the same two of the
broadest and flat moor-stones as a cover, supported by three
perpendicular stones of suitable strength or bigness, that they had
seen in the adjacent country. In the vacant space, vault, or arch
under those stones, they found decayed or broken pieces of the urn or
ossilegium, and about a gallon of black matter and ashes, which
doubtless was the gleanings or remains of that once famous human
creature, before the fifth century interred here, with many thousands
others, doubtless of less degree in the contiguous lands thereof, who
had not money to raise such troublesome, laborious, and costly funeral
monuments as those four burrows were, and still are.

Cur-Lyghon in this parish is now transnominated to Carlyon; and here
for many descents lived the family from thence denominated Curlyghon,
who were gentlemen of considerable fame, lands, and revenues in those
parts, as appeared to me from several old Latin deeds, some bearing
date 6 Henry V. (see Truro); from whence it came by marriage, descent,
or purchase to Burleigh, and from him to Hawes, as I was informed.


TONKIN.

I take the name to be a corruption of Caius; and that St. Caius, Pope
and kinsman to the Emperor Dioclesian, who suffered martyrdom under
the said Emperor in 296, is the tutelar patron of this church, which
is a daughter to Kenwyn, and passes in the same presentation, being
valued with it in the King’s Books at 16_l._ The patronage in the
Bishop of Exeter. The incumbent Mr. Mitchell, the oldest clergyman now
living in this county; who though aged, and his churches three miles
apart from each other, regularly serves them both every Sunday; he is
since dead, in 1731, and has been succeeded by the Reverend Walter
Borlase, LL.D. and vicar of Maddern.

In this parish lies the extensive manor of Blanchland, latinized into
Albalonda. This manor gave name to a considerable family, in which it
continued for many descents. The last of them, Otho de Albalonda, had
only one daughter and heir, Johanna, married in his lifetime to John
Boscawen, of Tregothnon, in the 31st year of Edward III. and carried
this rich inheritance into that family; in which it hath ever since
continued, to their very great advantage, having within these fifty
years brought them more money for copper than almost all the other
mines in the county together, if the last twenty years are excepted,
during which time great discoveries have been made in various other
places. Neither are the wastrels of this manor destitute of good mines
of tin; one of which, called the White Works, occasioned a law-suit
between Mr. John Mayo, of Truro, owner of the tin bounds thereon, and
Mr. Hugh Boscawen, lord of the soil, towards the latter end of the
reign of Charles the Second.

Mr. Mayo claimed the farm or toll of the copper-ore, as well as of the
tin, in right of his bounds; but the suit was very justly determined
in favour of Mr. Boscawen, as Lord of the Soil, for that the right of
the tin as bounder was only by the custom of the Stannaries, and that
no such custom could be pleaded for copper ore.

This one suit put an end to all disputes between the lords of the soil
and the bounders, which otherwise would have been endless, and very
much to the discouragement of copper mines; and there have not been
wanting some designing people of late, who made application to King
George II. then Prince of Wales, falsely representing that much tin
ore was carried into Wales with the copper ore, and there separated
from the copper, to his great loss of duties.

Guddern. This place hath been for several generations the seat, on
lease from the family of Boscawen, of the Bowdens; perhaps ever since
the Albalonda’s time, although they were possessed of fair estates in
fee elsewhere.

Reginald Bowden, Esq. is the present possessor.

Nansavallan. Avallan is an apple-tree, and the name signifies the
valley of apple-trees. This I take to have been the chief seat of the
Albalondas, as it hath been since of some of the Boscawens; and
particularly of late years that of Charles Boscawen, Esq. a younger
son to Hugh Boscawen, Esq. and sometime Member of Parliament for
Tregony, and a Justice of the Peace. The arms of Albalonda were,
Gules, three bends Argent; Mr. Bowden’s, Azure, a chevron between
seven griffins’ heads couped Or, each head transfixed by a dagger, the
pommel Or, the blade Proper.

Adjoining to Nansavallan is Kelliou, the groves, this name being the
plural of Kelli, a grove. It was once the seat of a family of the same
name, but whether they were of the same stock with the Kellios of
Lanleke and Rosiline I am yet to learn. By a daughter and heir, this
place, if I am not mistaken, came to Edward Vivian, Esq. a younger son
to Vivian of Trenoweth, by whom he had only one daughter and heir
Jane, married to John Howeis, of Redruth, whose great-grandson
Reginald Howeis, Esq. is the present owner of it. He was Sheriff of
Cornwall in the tenth year of George I. 1724, and hath married
Susanna, the eldest daughter and coheir of Edward Harris, Esq.; and
his brother Edward Howeis, Jane her younger sister, and both have
issue. The family of Howeis, give for their arms, Azure, a fess wavy
between three lions passant Or, armed and langued Gules.

Trevoster. This place is very pleasantly situated on Truro river,
facing the town, from which it is but two miles distant by water. This
was a seat of a younger branch of the Trevanion family, for here lived
John Trevanion, youngest son of John Trevanion, of Carhays, Esq. which
John Trevanion had by his wife, the daughter of      Holland, Esq.
of Devonshire, a son of the same name, who married Marianne, the
daughter of John Somaster, of Painsford, in Devon, Esq. by whom he had
three daughters and coheiresses. Mary, married to Richard Trefusis, of
Trefusis, Esq.; Joan, to William Bligh, of Botathon, Esq.; and Alice
to Nicholas Boscawen, of Tregothnan, Esq.

Since that, Trevoster has been held on lease by one of the family of
Davies, and now Mr. Howeis, of Killion, has a lease of it on lives.

All these estates before mentioned, I take to be within the manor of
Blanchland, and I have passed by one place in it to the north-west of
the Great Works, called Kelly freth: this was for several generations
the seat, in lease from the Boscawens, of the Winters, a younger
branch of that eminent family in Gloucestershire, and the family
remained here till very lately, giving for their arms, Sable, a fess
Ermine.

I don’t know whether it be worth while to take notice of a place to
the south of it, called Chase Water, which being on the great road
between Truro and Redruth, and very near the Great Works, hath now
several houses built in it.


_The manor of Key, alias Landegay._

I take this to be the same with that called by Mr. Carew Landegy. I
find this parish called Ecclesia de Landigay.

This manor was forfeited by Francis Tregion, Esq. with the rest of his
estate, as may be seen in Probus.

About the 8th or 9th Charles I. this manor was given or sold for a
small sum by the King to William Coryton, of Newton, Esq. in whose
family it hath remained ever since. On the commons belonging to
Guddern is a large barrow called Guddern Barrow, near which are
several large moorstones; and also at no great distance is another
barrow, called Craig Vrause, or the large barrow, remarkable for
giving name to some good mines of tin and copper near it.


THE EDITOR.

All the legends of this parish concur in claiming for their patron
Saint Kea, one of the great company of missionaries, and as the
ludicrous, almost from a species of fatality, appears to have blended
itself with these ancient tales, a large block of granite, hollow on
one side, which happened to lie near the bank of the river, was for
centuries pointed out as the boat used by St. Kea to waft himself from
Ireland to the Cornish shore; and so currently was this story
repeated, that, if persons went to sea in a vessel not adequate to the
service, it was observed they might as well have made a voyage with
St. Kea in his moorstone trough.

Mr. Hals having used a strange orthography for Nansavallan, and given
as fanciful a derivation of the word; both are omitted, since Nans or
Nance is known to be a vale; and Avallan may be proved to be the
Celtic name of an apple, by referring to the History of Glastonbury.
This seat of the Albalandas presented within fifty years one of the
most venerable specimens in all that neighbourhood of the dwellings
used by gentlemen of consideration in former times.

It was entirely surrounded and sheltered by large trees, and at some
little distance stood a wood more extensive than any one west of it;
and both were conspicuous and pleasing objects from the whole district
round Truro; but the _auri sacri fames_ has swept away the whole, and
the place is now become very little preferable to an open down. The
Editor expresses himself with some feeling on this subject, having
passed at Nanceavallan many happy weeks of his childhood; and fancied
the wood an exact counterpart of that in which the favourite objects
of infantine compassion perished from want of food, and were painfully
covered over with leaves by the little bird, doubly consecrated by
this effort of his kindness.

In the hands of the proprietor, the farm of Nanceavallan is however
now improving, by extensive drainages, and by a system of husbandry,
that cannot fail of extending the benefit derived from example to all
the neighbourhood.

Killiow is now the seat of Mr. Robert Lovell Gwatkin, where he has
built an almost entirely new house with extensive gardens and
plantations, improved the land, and made the whole into a handsome
modern residence.

To this gentleman the parish is also mainly indebted for a removal of
the church.

Either cultivation began on the banks of the river, or a strong
feeling of veneration was entertained for the spot where St. Kea
landed from his granite trough, but so it happened that the church
stood at one extremity of the parish, and that by far the least
populous. Mr. Gwatkin led the way, and contributed largely towards
constructing a new church much nearer to the great mass of the
inhabitants; in this he was followed by other proprietors, and a
spacious church is now in use for divine service between Killiow and
Nanceavallan. Prayers, with a sermon suited to the occasion, were
first given, after reading the Bishop’s license, on the 3d of October
1802, being the feasten Sunday, to a congregation so large as almost
to fill the churchyard as well as the church itself, which is
decorated by Mrs. Gwatkin, niece of Sir Joshua Reynolds, with
paintings which that great artist could not have failed to admire. The
tower alone remains to point out the site of the former church.

Mr. Reginald Haweis, mentioned as the possessor of Killiow by Hals,
received his education as a Gentleman Commoner of Exeter College; but
he spent the whole of the remainder of his life in retirement. One
Oxford anecdote he used to relate with peculiar pleasure. It seems
that he was selected to recite some Latin verses in the theatre,
commemorating the victory of Blenheim, an event without parallel in
the modern history of Europe till the year 1815. In the verses
occurred this apostrophe, Quo, Tallarde! ruis? and as Mr. Haweis was
actually pronouncing these words, the Duke of Marlborough with Marshal
Tallard entered the theatre, amidst thunders of applause. But possibly
the entrance of Marshal Tallard may be a mistake.

Mr. Reginald Haweis and his brother Edward, both stated to have
families, died childless; and the estate devolved on Mr. David Haweis,
the grandson of an uncle.

That uncle had been a beneficed clergyman, but was deprived with the
two thousand turned out to poverty and to suffer persecution (see St.
Hilary parish) on St. Bartholomew’s day 1662; a day ill chosen by
those who might recollect what happened on the same festival ninety
years before.

This gentleman having a family, and being without support, found
himself obliged to dispose of them in any way to procure their own
maintenance, and his eldest son submitted to become a barber. His son
was apprenticed to the same trade; and on him the estate devolved. He
married a gentlewoman, Miss Kempe, of Roseland; but persevering in low
habits of intemperance, the peculiar vice of that time, he died at an
early age, leaving the property to his widow for her life, with the
remainder to his sisters. They were married, and in stations not more
elevated than his own; their husbands were ready to pursue a line of
conduct similar to that which had cut short the ’squire’s life; and in
consequence, the whole reversionary interests were soon dissipated,
with the exception of one subdivided portion, transmitted by a
sister’s daughter, who died early in life, to her only daughter, Mary
Ann Jenkins, of whom it may be sufficient to say, that if the whole
estate had devolved on her, it would have been in hands worthy of her
best ancestors.

On the banks of the river, directly opposite to Tregothnan, the
magnificent seat of Lord Falmouth, is a farm called Trelease,
belonging to the Editor; for beauty of natural situation and for
command of prospect, scarcely inferior to Tregothnan itself.

But if ancient romances could be relied on as authorities, the place
most deserving of regard in this parish, or in the whole county, after
Tintagell Castle, would be Carlian, since Thomas of Erceldowne, the
celebrated northern poet of the twelfth century, universally known by
the appellation of Thomas the Rhymer, describes Carlian as the
birth-place of the renowned Sir Tristrem, Knight of the Round Table,
companion of Arthur and the chief hero of chivalry, where all exceed
not merely the prowess, but whatever the imagination can create in
these degenerate times. Yet perhaps the armies and fleets of England
may say,

  Taccia Argo i Mini, e taccio Artu che suoi
  Erranti, che di sogni empion le carte.

Chase Water is now grown almost into a town.  A chapel has recently
been built there for the accommodation of a dense population; but in
such wretched taste as to burlesque the worst imitation of Gothic.

  The parish of Kea measures 7382 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           4306    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1254    7    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   2440   |   2766   |   3142   |   3837
    giving an increase of 57 per cent. in 30 years.
  In 1821 and in 1831 the population of Tregavethen is
    subjoined, 66―59.
  The present Vicar of Kea is the Rev. George J. Cornish,
    collated by the Bishop of Exeter in 1828.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The southern part of Kea is formed of the same rock as the adjoining
parish of Feock; the northern part runs towards the granite, and is
similar to the corresponding part of Gwennap; and, like it, has been
much explored by mines.

Baldue, the Black Work, about a mile east of Chase Water, has produced
great quantities of the sulphate of zinc, called by the miners Black
Jack.




KELLINGTON, OR CALLINGTON.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Eastwellshire, and hath upon the north
Stoke Clemsland and South Hill, east St. Dominick, south St. Mellin,
west St. Eve.

At the time of the first inquisition into the value of Cornish
benefices by the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, anno Dom. 1294,
this church had no endowment, neither was it then consolidated into
South Hill; but before Wolsey’s inquisition 1521, they were both
united, and were then valued for revenues at 38_l._ per annum; the
patronage in the Duke of Cornwall, who endowed it; the incumbent
Trelawnye; the town and parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax
1696, 120_l._ 16_s._

This church or chapel town bailiwick is now known by the name of the
town, manor, and borough of Killiton, i. e. chapel town, privileged
with the jurisdiction of a Court Leet, and sending two Members to sit
in the Commons’ House of Parliament, which are chosen by the tenants
of the said manor that are freeholders; as also by a jury chosen out
of them, is elected the Mayor or Portreeve that governs the said
borough yearly; the arms of which are in a field, a wreathed flourish.
This borough is also privileged with a weekly market on Wednesdays;
and fairs yearly on April 23, September 8, and November 1.

The writ to remove an action at law depending in this town Court Leet,
as also the precept for electing Members of Parliament, must be thus
directed: Preposito et Burgensibus Burgi nostri de Killiton in com.
Cornubiæ salutem; and for the same purpose, to remove an action at law
depending in the Hundred Court Baron of this Bailiwick, the writ must
be thus directed: Senescallo et Ballivo Hundredi et Libertatis nostri
de Eastwellshire in comitatu Cornubiæ salutem.

Near this place is situate Hengiston Downs, the place mentioned by
Roger Hoveden in his Latin Chronicle, which says, that in the year of
our Lord 806 a great fleet of Danes arrived in West Wales, which some
conjecture to be Cornwall, not North or South Wales (in all thirteen
shires); especially for that he says, the Welsh joined in insurrection
with them against Egbright thirteenth King of England or the West
Saxons, by whom they were all overthrown at a place called,
Hengis-ton·dun, i. e. Hengis-ton-dun; that is to say, Hengist’s
fenced, fortified or camp town, which some take to be Hengiston Downs
aforesaid, which place in former ages so abounded with tin that it
gave occasion to those rhimes, (neither is it at present altogether
destitute thereof)

  Hengiston Downe well ywrought,
  Is worth London towne dear ybought.――Carew.

In this town or borough of Killington, for retirement and delight,
lived Sir Edward Bray, Knight, originally descended, as tradition
says, from the Brays of Bray, in St. Just in Cornwall, that came into
England with William the Conqueror, otherwise from Ralph de Bray,
Sheriff of Hampshire, third of King John.

The Bray’s arms were, in a field Argent, a chevron between three
eagles’ legs erased at the knees Sable. He gave also in a field Varry
Purple and Argent, three bendlets Gules.

Sir Reginald Bray, Knight Banneret and of the Garter, Privy Councillor
to King Henry VII. and Speaker of the House of Commons in his eleventh
year, is noted to have made the usual protestation for himself to that
King, without any petition for the liberty of the Commons, as is to be
seen in modus tenendi Parliamentum: he was a brother of the Lord Bray,
or descended from the same family. (See Camden in Hampshire.) Others
will not allow those Brays to be of British, but of French descent,
from the province of Bray in that country, and that they came into
England with the Conqueror, and that the many places in Cornwall
distinguished by the name of Bray were denominated from them after
their coming into England: but of this query.

A Knight Banneret was made in the field or camp of war, under the
King’s standard, who was personally present, by cutting off the point
of his standard, and making it a banner; after which they might
display their particular arms in a banner in the King’s army, and take
place of Knights Bachelors.


TONKIN.

As for the name of this parish, which is a daughter church to South
Hill, and has for its patron saint St. Nicholas, Bishop of Myra in
Lycia, I take it to be Killy-Ton, the town in a grove of trees.

Then follows a long conjectural account of the lords of this manor,
which is wholly uninteresting, and therefore omitted.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Tonkin does not state on what authority he has assigned the town
and parish to the care of St. Nicholas. The popularity of this saint
is now, and always has been, so great as to render the fact of his
being the patron very probable. He is held in the highest veneration
throughout Russia.

St. Nicholas ran through the ordinary course of those days. He became
a monk, succeeded to the abbacy of his convent; and when the clergy of
Myra assembled to elect a Bishop, and almost agreed in their choice,
they were divinely instructed to wait till the next day, and then to
choose the person who first offered himself to their notice, on their
opening the church-door. They obeyed; and in the morning St. Nicholas
was led to the spot by an irresistible impulse. He assisted in
overthrowing the Arians, under the direction of Constantine, at the
Council of Nice. All these, however, were matters of frequent
occurrence. The fame of St. Nicholas rests on something more unusual;
and if the tale is of a date sufficiently early, it may have been the
cause of his subsequent advancement, and of his having obtained an
influence so great as to effect the change of his simple bishoprick
into a metropolitan see, with thirty-six suffragans.

So very early was the _præcox ingenium_ of this saint directed towards
observances, then deemed most acceptable to the Divinity, that when an
infant in arms he rigidly abstained, every Wednesday and Friday, and
on all other days kept as fasts by the church, from touching his
nurse’s breast; for this truly wonderful ascetic achievement he has
been deservedly accounted the peculiar patron of children, and more
especially the preserver of their health.

He died in 342, and was buried in the Cathedral at Myra; but in the
year 1087 his relics were forcibly taken from a country no longer
Christian, and were enshrined in the Cathedral of St. Stephen at Bavi
in Italy, where pilgrims have ever since resorted in great numbers to
witness or to experience miraculous cures effected by his intercession
with Almighty God.

His festival is kept on the 6th of December, and on this day the
ludicrous or profane ceremony of the Boy Bishop used to be exhibited
in most Cathedrals. At Salisbury a boy is represented on a monument,
dressed in the habit of a bishop including the mitre; and this is said
to have been occasioned by the lad dying in his mock pontificate.

Mr. Lysons states, that the manor of Callington has passed through
various families, Ferrers, Champernowne, Willoughby, Dennis, and
Rolle.

The heiress of Samuel Rolle brought it to Robert Walpole, Earl of
Orford, son of Sir Robert Walpole; and on the death of his son George
Walpole in 1791, _sine prole_, this property passed to Mr. Robert
George William Trefusis, of Trefusis in Cornwall, together with the
barony of Clinton, created by writ of summons to Parliament in the
reign of Edward the First.

George Walpole, Earl of Orford, executed a deed by which, after
reserving a life interest to himself, and a power of revocation never
acted on, he settled the remainder in fee of all such property as came
to him from his maternal relations, on the right heir of Samuel Rolle,
son of Robert Rolle and Arabella Clinton, his ancestor, from whom the
Barony had descended; but his legal adviser forgot a most important
distinction between deeds and wills; a will not coming into action
till after the testator’s death, when Mr. Trefusis would have been the
undoubted heir of Samuel Rolle; but the deed, being effective from the
instant of its execution, vested the remainder in Mr. George Walpole
himself, the then heir of Samuel Rolle; and on his decease carried the
property which had vested in him by act of law, although in direct
opposition to his wishes and intention, from the maternal line to that
of his father. Fortunately, however, in this instance, the whole was
under mortgage, which brought the cognizance of the affair into
Chancery. Mr. Trefusis took possession unopposed; and proceedings to
obtain the property in consequence of the mistake, were not commenced
till after twenty years, when a solemn decision of the House of Lords
declared that the interference came too late for disturbing matters in
equity.

It is obvious that Mr. George Walpole should have settled the
remainder in fee on such person as would be the heir of Samuel Rolle
after his own decease, or perhaps in trustees for such person. Mr.
Trefusis (Lord Clinton) has since disposed of the Callington property
to Mr. Alexander Baring.

This town or village received a Tudor charter in the 27th year of
Queen Elizabeth, and continued to fulfil the duties, for which the
corporation was instituted, till 1832, when the privilege of sending
Members to Parliament ceased to exist.

  Callington parish measures 2387 statute acres.
  Value of the Real Property, as               £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           4142    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           950   17    0
  Population,  {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {   819   |   938    |   1321   |   1388
    giving an increase of 69 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The north-eastern part of this parish extends to the foot of Kitt
Hill, the most elevated point in Hingston Down, which is composed of
granite. The slate adjoining thereto resembles that which occurs in
similar situations in the parishes of St. Austell and St. Blazey; and
it has also been the scene of mining speculations. As the town of
Callington is approached, the slate becomes of a darker blue, and
passes into hornblende rock, which prevails in the other parts of this
parish; but where quartz predominates, the land is barren. This rock,
however, does not possess here a very marked character, nor is it
frequently exposed to view; near St. Eve it appears to graduate into
the calcareous series.




KENWYN.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north Peran
Sabulo, and St. Allen, east St. Clement’s, south Truro, west Kea.

In the Domesday tax 20 William I. 1087, this district was rated under
the jurisdiction of Edles. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of
Lincoln and Winchester, into the value of Cornish benefices, 1294,
there is no such church as Kenwen named then in the hundred of Powdre;
if it were then extant, at that time it had no endowment; however, I
find in the 15th granted by the Clergy, the 24th Henry VI. 1447, the
parish of Kenwen in Powdre was rated 2_l._ 19_s._; in Wolsey’s
Inquisition, 1521, Landegge or Keyewis consolidated into Kenwen (the
elder church into the younger) and rated as aforesaid 16_l._ The
patronage in the Bishop of Exon, who endowed them; the incumbent
Mitchell, and the parish of Kenwen rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land
Tax 1696, 196_l._ 14_s._ 6_d._

Near Edles, or Ideless, i. e. narrow breadth (formerly the voke lands
of a considerable manor, taxed in Domesday Book as aforesaid,
privileged then with the jurisdiction of a Court Leet) is yet to be
seen the ruins and downfalls of St. Clare’s consecrated and walled
well; chapelwise built, by the Nuns of the nunnery-house of Poor
Clares in Trurow, called An-hell, i. e. the hall; but yet, alas! as
tradition saith, they were not so poor as their rule obligeth them to
be, for in the walls of this well they had deposited or hid away
considerable sums of money, which, by tradition or some dream, was
discovered tempore James II. to some of the inhabitants of this
parish, who one night pulled down the walls and totally defaced this
chapel-well in quest thereof, and probably succeeded in their design
and undertaking, for soon after some poor labourers in agriculture
became rich farmers and landed men, and others. From this place was
denominated a family of gentlemen, surnamed de Idless, whose heir was
married to Hamley, tempore Edward III.

Trega-veth-an, in this parish, the grave town or dwelling, so called
from the cemetery and free chapel yet extant here, of public use
before the church of Kenwen was erected; which barton and manor for
several descents was the lands of a Welch family of gentlemen surnamed
de Langhairons; i. e. holy or sacred laws; till the latter end of the
reign of King Charles II. when Mr. Langhairne sold this barton to
Walter Vincent, Esq., barrister at law, and the manor to Mr. Bawden
and others. The arms of Langhairne were Azure, a chevron between three
escallops Or.

Chyn-coos in this parish, i. e. the wood-house, formerly surrounded
with woods, is the dwelling of Thomas Hawes, Gent., that married Hawes
of Kea, and Paynter; and giveth the same arms as the Hawses of Kea.


TONKIN.

The manor of Tregavethan.

This signifies the dwelling in the meadows, vethen being the same with
bither, a meadow; and whoever sees the place will be soon convinced of
the truth of this etymology.

Tregedick was lord of the manor and sometimes dwelt here, but having
only one daughter and heir, the barton passed with her to ――――
Langhairne, Esq., but the father having reserved the manor, he in
consequence of some difference sold it. The Langhairnes, however,
continued to reside on the barton in much esteem till the great Civil
Wars, in which this family suffered so much as to be compelled to sell
it; and it came at last into the possession of Henry Vincent, Gent.,
of Tresinsple, who let out the barton in leases to several tenants, so
that it is now become a village, and little of the mansion or house
left standing.

To the west of Tregavethan, or the high town, on the confines between
this parish and those of St. Agnes and Perran in the Sands, are three
great barrows, called the Three Barrows; and about a mile to the
westward of these on very high ground are four barrows, one belonging
to this manor and the other three to Lambourn in Perran. These barrows
give name to the downs, and the great road from London to the Land’s
End passes between them. They were doubtless the burying places of
some principal commanders, and probably Danes. To the left of
Tregavethan and within the manor, is Roseworth, the Green Valley. This
was once a seat of the family of Cosens; and here lived Nicholas
Cosens, Esq. who was Sheriff of Cornwall in the year 1660. He dying
without issue left it to his widow, and after his death it became the
property of Samuel Enys, Esq. by purchase.


THE EDITOR.

Kenwyn may be said to include the old part of Truro, which occupies
the mere extremity of a point or tongue of land stretching from this
parish and enclosed between two rivers. The land immediately round the
town is fertile, in a high state of cultivation, and decorated by
trees and villas; but towards the Four Barrow Down and Chasewater,
nothing can be more desolate than the barren commons studded with
heaps of rubbish from deserted mines.

In this parish are situate two of the earliest establishments for
smelting tin by means of coal, and on the largest scale of any in the
county, Calenick and Cavedras; but of late years this business has
taken an entirely new character; tin ores are sold, like those of
copper, by public tender or ticketings, and smelting houses are
constructed in some cases for the use of particular mines.

The manor of Newham formed part of the Bodregan property, and after
the despoiling of Sir Henry Bodregan by King Henry VII. it was given
to Trevanion, of whom it was purchased by the late Mr. Ralph Allen
Daniell, sometime member for West Looe, by whom a handsome house has
been built on the side of the river, half a mile below Truro; Bosvigo
is also a gentleman’s seat.

And at Comprigney, near Bosvigo, the Editor apprehends that several
ancestors in succession of General Sir Hussey Vivian resided. Kenwyn
church and tower, with an excellent glebe house adjacent, built about
the year 1780, are very conspicuous objects, and command themselves a
fine view of the town and river. The church is provided with a set of
bells said to surpass all others in the country; and to have been
placed there when ringing was a favourite amusement with the
neighbouring gentlemen.

  This parish measures 8,094 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         13,296    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          2133    1    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   4017  |    5000  |    6221  |    8492
    giving an increase of 111 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This large parish does not appear to offer anything peculiar in its
geology, as Doctor Boase merely remarks that Kenwyn lies entirely on
slate, which is of the same nature as that of St. Allen and St.
Clement’s.




ST. KEVERNE.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon the north St.
Martin’s, east St. Anthony, west Ruan Minor, south the British
Channel. As for the modern name, whether it be derived from the Saxon
Geferon, Geforan, Geuoran, i. e. Geferon, Geforan, Geuoran,
synonymous words, signifying a fraternity, seers, equals, fellows,
inspectors, with reference to the six, eight, or twelve men of this
parish, who as a body politic, corporation, or fraternity, govern the
same in joint or equal manner; or from the British Keveren, as schism,
separation or division in church matters or religion (see Lhuyd upon
Schisma); or from Kieran, a famous Bishop amongst the Britons about
the fifth century, who perhaps was born in this place, and is the
tutelar guardian and patron of this Church; and to him also is
dedicated St. Kieran rectory, in decanatu Christianitatis in Exeter:
of which every man may think as he please.

In the Inquisition made into the value of Cornish Benefices by the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, ecclesia Sancti Kierani, in
decanatu de Kerryer, xxii_l._ viii_s._ iiii_d._ Vicar ejusdem iiii_l._
vi_s._ viii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, 18_l._ 11_s._ 4_d._ The
patronage in Bulteel; the Incumbent Gerry; the Rectory in possession
of Heale; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696,
by the name of St. Keverne, 310_l._ 16_s._ 4_d._

Part of this new parish of St. Keverne, at the time of the Norman
Conquest, was rated in the Domesday Book, 1087, under the jurisdiction
of Treleage (i. e. Physician or Surgeon’s Town, or the Law Town); it
is now the possession of Robert Buggin, Esq. (id est, Bacon) who
married Prudence, daughter of John Arundell of Trethall, Esq.; his
father, Jane, the daughter of Sir Francis Vyvyan, Knight, a younger
branch of Gatcomb House in Devon, originally descended from Zacharias
Boggan, Gent., Mayor of Totness, A.D. 1550, whose ancestors were
merchants of that town, and gave for their arms, Sable, a cocatrice
displayed Argent, membered and taloned Gules.

Note further, that as ker, kerr, kyr, kir, signifies dear, beloved,
choicely affectioned, in British, Cornish, and the Armorick languages,
answerable to dilectus in Latin; so from thence proceeds Kerryer, a
lover, or one dearly affectioned. See Floyd upon _dilectus_.

Tre-land in this parish (either the temple town, or a town notable for
land) was another district or manor, taxed in Domesday Roll; and I
take it, there are yet extant two tenements here called Tre-land Vear,
and Tre-land Vean; i. e. the greater and less Tre-lands. One of those
places, as I am informed, is the dwelling of John Hayme, Gent. (Saxon,
i. e. a house, home, or covering; see also Verstegan upon this word)
that married Tregose; his father Boggans.

In this parish is situate Condura and Tregarne, manors formerly
pertaining to Condura, Earl of Cornwall.

Lanareh, also Lan-arth, in this parish is the dwelling of Sampson
Sanns, Gent., that married Cood, which tenement or barton was formerly
the lands of Kensham, who sold it to the present possessors.

This Mr. Sanns died without legal issue about the year 1696, and left
his estate to his brother’s son, John Sanns, that married Hamley of
St. Neot, now in possession thereof, who in the month of January, in
the afternoon, in the year 1702, with seven other persons, men and
women of this parish, coming by sea from Falmouth town and harbour
towards their own homes in a fishing boat of about five tons burden,
without deck or covering, on a fair day; and having got off at sea
about a league beyond the said harbour, and within two leagues of
their dwelling to the west; suddenly there happened to arise a high
and mighty storm of wind against them, which rose the rapid waves of
the sea to that degree, that the boatmen or oarmen, with all their
skill or strength, were not able to put the boat further forward
without its being filled with water or swallowed up with the raging
sea.

Whereupon, despairing of getting home to St. Keverne, they all
resolved if possible to return back to Falmouth harbour before this
tempestuous storm of wind that blew that way, or to run on shore on
any other part of the country as they could. But, alas! they no sooner
attempted those expedients, and turned their boat, but instantly the
wind turned and thwarted their design. In this extremity they knew not
what to do; both wind and water being thus outrageous against them:
and that which added more to their calamity was, that, through their
long toiling at sea, the light of the sun was past and night
approached.

Then every person present being at their wit’s end, called upon his
God for pardon of their sins, and mercy upon their souls, as
despairing of the preservation of their bodies from the merciless
element of the seas; when at length, after much fervent prayers,
tears, and cries, the watermen proposed, all other their endeavours
failing, that the boat must be left to drive before the wind and sea,
to such port or place as God in his infinite mercy and providence
should guide it.

This course was taken, and the boat forthwith, by letting loose its
helm, in a dark long night and most tremendous storm or hurricane,
followed the current of the wind and waves all night; the passengers
every minute casting out of the boat such water as the outrageous seas
cast in upon her, least she might thereby be overwhelmed or filled
therewith. At length the glimpse of daylight appeared, when they
beheld themselves environed with the billows of the great ocean,
without sight of either sun, moon, stars, or land. The storm still
continuing all that day and the night after, also the third day and
the night after, the boat and mariners in the same condition as
aforesaid, when afterwards the fourth day in the morning, the wind and
seas being somewhat abated of their fury and violence, about ten of
the clock they discovered land, and forthwith rowed and steered the
boat to the sea-shore thereof, where they arrived with the boat
safely; which happened to be, as I was informed, on the coast of
Normandy in France, about a hundred leagues distance from the place
the boat first was driven off at sea. Which happened to be at such
time as Queen Anne had wars with the French King. As soon as Mr. Sanns
and his companions stept on land, they were met by three or four men
with fusees, demanding what they were (as they judged, for they
understood not French), to which they replied they were English; which
one of them that understood the English tongue hearing, demanded the
occasion of their coming there, and by what expedient they came over;
the particulars of which hearing, as aforesaid, they were all
astonished to hear of their hazardous passage, miraculous
preservation, and to behold the boat, the instrument thereof next
Providence.

Upon which discourse, a gentleman of the company asked Mr. Sanns what
part of England he was born in, to which he replied Cornwall; and
further interrogated him whether his name were not Sanns, to which he
replied that it was; ‘Why then,’ said the gentleman, ‘I know your
person, and well remember the kindness you shewed me in my distress
many years since at your house, when the ship in which I was, was cast
away and lost on the coast of St. Kevern;’ understanding which, after
they embraced each other. Then, he demanded their arms and money, if
any; whereupon Mr. Sanns having with him forty guineas that he had
received at Falmouth for pilchards, the day before his boat was driven
off at sea, he forthwith delivered it to his friend, who told him he
and his companions must yield themselves prisoners of war; which
accordingly they did, and Mr. Sanns was taken home to the gentleman’s
house. After which they were all examined concerning the premises
before a justice of the peace, who finding matters as aforesaid,
ordered that they should not be kept in custody as prisoners of war,
but be all permitted to go at liberty and beg the alms of the people;
whereupon they found extraordinary charity and favour amongst them,
since they were not enemies, but persons by fate or Providence,
brought there after an especial manner, and preserved from the
violence of the seas by the great Maker and Protector of all things.

The news whereof forthwith not only flew over the country, but was
transmitted to the cognizance of King Lewis XIV., who thereupon
ordered that by the first transport ship for prisoners of war, they
should all be sent home freely into England; which happening soon
after, Mr. Sanns took his leave of his kind landlord, in whose house
he had been dieted and entertained, and was content to leave the forty
guineas aforesaid with him, as his recompence; but contrary to his
expectation the gentleman gave the same to him again, saying he would
take nothing of that kind at his hands, since God in such a wonderful
manner had preserved him and his companions from the great danger of
the seas. Whereupon, he presented five or six guineas to his wife, who
after some reluctancy accepted thereof, and so they parted and went on
board a transport ship, and safely landed at Portsmouth; and in about
eight weeks after their departure from England, returned safe to St.
Keverne, to the great joy and astonishment of their friends and
relations, who concluded them all drowned long before.

And that the reader may not think those people’s subsistence three
nights and four days in their dangerous sea voyage, was as
supernatural as their preservation, it must be remembered, that one of
Mr. Sanns’ companions being a woman that was an inn-keeper, had bought
at Falmouth town before they departed thence, for to sell to her
customers, twelve pennyworth of white bread and three or four gallons
of brandy, which proved the material support of their lives. Matthew
of Westminster, our Chronologer, tells us that about the year 900,
Dusblan, Machreu and one Maxlium, in a boat made of one ox skin and a
half, with seven days provisions, in two days and a night arrived
miraculously into Cornwall from Ireland, at the Mount’s Bay.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin does not add any thing to Mr. Hals’s narrative, except the
single observation,

It takes its name from the famous St. Keven.


THE EDITOR.

St. Keverne’s fame does not extend out of Cornwall. He must have been
one of the Irish missionaries who crossed the seas in granite troughs,
or in skiffs made of bullocks’ hides. Tales were in circulation about
mutual visits from St. Perran and St. Kevern, but they contain only
vulgar incidents of modern fabrication.

The extraordinary escape of the passengers from Falmouth, is retained
at the full length in which Mr. Hals relates it, as the narrative
bears evident marks of authenticity, and the incidents are creditable
to all the parties introduced.

This parish is amply provided with small harbours or coves affording
shelter to boats, and the shore admits of using seine nets for taking
pilchards. The principal of these harbours, Coverack, has been long
noted for an extensive trade, still more lucrative than fishing; the
other two are Porthoustock (Proustock) and Porthalla (Prala).

About seventy years since a large shoal of pilchards came into the
cove at Porthoustock, while the seine boats were on the outside. One
of these extended its net across the entrance and shut in the whole;
but salt in sufficient quantity could not be procured for saving them,
when the fishermen resolved on the hazardous expedient of sailing to
France for a supply; the weather continued fine till their return, and
they are reported to have prepared for exportation above a thousand
hogsheads. The Church is situated on the highest ground in this whole
district, having the addition of a spire instead of the lofty tower
usual in Cornwall. The existing spire is of recent date, although
probably on the model of that which was destroyed by lightning on the
28th of February 1770.

For a very accurate and able account of this thunder storm, which
occurred during divine service, and seems to have been one of the most
violent on record, see a paper in the 61st vol. of the Philosophical
Transactions, p. 71, art. 8, 1771; (and vol. 13, p. 98, of the
Abridgment,) by the Rev. Anthony Williams, then Vicar.

The spire was rent in pieces. The roof of the church almost entirely
destroyed; large stones scattered over the floor, and small stones on
the outside carried to a distance little short of a quarter of a mile.
Mr. Williams himself was rendered insensible, the whole congregation,
with very few exceptions, fell on the ground deprived of all
recollection; but no life was lost, nor did any sustain a serious
injury; about ten were slightly hurt.

In the church are several monuments; and in the churchyard stands a
large sarcophagus, having sculptured on it the representation of a
shipwreck, and military emblems, with the following inscription.

  To the memory of Major-General H. G. C. Cavendish,
  Capt. S. C. Duckenfield, Lieut. the Hon. E. Waldegrave,
  Sixty-one non-commissioned officers and privates
  of the regiment,
  who in returning from Spain in the Despatch transport
  unhappily perished in Coverack Cove,
  the 22nd of December 1809.

The ship was known to be very old and in bad repair; but, although the
wind blew with some violence, it would have been a matter of no
difficulty whatever to clear the Mein Egles, or Manacles Rocks. Seamen
have therefore conjectured that the Captain kept near the shore for
the purpose of stranding his vessel, to obtain the exaggerated value
contracted for with the Government; and that in attempting this fraud,
he fell on the rocks which caused the loss of every one on board.

Mr. Cavendish was a son of Lord George Cavendish, of East Bourn,
Sussex, afterwards created Earl of Burlington.

The great tithes of this parish have been sold to the various
proprietors of the land.

The tithes of fish belonged, however, to Mr. Matthew Wills of Helston,
in right of his marriage with the only daughter of Mr. Tonkin of
Trenance near Porthoustock. For some years they were of considerable
value, but as all tithe of fish is allowed to be in this country the
mere creature of custom, the custom then acted on was attacked at law,
and after a trial, on which the celebrated Mr. Dunning attended by a
special retainer, it was overturned. Trenance and the other property
in St. Kevern are now possessed by his son, the Rev. Thomas Wills,
Vicar of Wendron, for about fifty years.

Kilter, in this parish, was the birthplace and probably belonged to
the individual of that name, who with Humphry Arundell and others,
excited the common people to take arms against the government of King
Edward VI. in 1549, by holding out those unattainable objects which
have misled the ignorant to their own destruction in all ages and
nations, in union with others certainly of a different description;
one of which was the re-establishment of the Bloody Statute, or the
Six Articles, by which every person refusing to acknowledge the King’s
supremacy over the church was adjudged to be hanged; and every one
conscientiously disbelieving the real presence of Christ’s body in
consecrated bread and wine, was condemned to be burnt alive.

Lanarth has been for a considerable time the residence of the Sandys
family. The Rev. Sampson Sandys lived there to a very advanced age. He
was probably grandson to the gentleman whose wonderful escape to the
coast of France is detailed by Mr. Hals under the name of Sanns, which
the editor remembers to have heard was the original appellation of
their family, till they adopted the name and cross-crosslets of the
Sandys of Ombersley.

Mr. Sampson Sandys was succeeded at Lanarth by his nephew, Mr. William
Sandys, a colonel in the army of the East India Company, who rebuilt
the house, and greatly improved the place.

The rectory was, before the Reformation, appropriated to the Abbey of
Beaulieu in Hampshire, founded by King John.

In the schedule of the property returned to King Henry the VIII. on
its surrender, are the following entries, which may be found in the
Augmentation Office.

   Com. Cornub.
      St. Kivion――Redd. Assis. lib. ten.    2 15 10
          Redd, et Firm. ten. ad volunt’    8  2  4
          Terr. dominic.                    1 16  8
          Tregonon, firma molend.           1  2  6
          Opera autumpnal’                  0  1  6
          Perquis’ cur’                     1  7  2
          Firma rector’                    57  4  0
          Helston red. annual’              6  3  4

The reasons assigned for King John founding this magnificent
Cistercian Abbey of Beaulieu, or De Bello Loco, are so curious, and so
illustrative of the profligacy and weak superstition united in forming
his character, that the Editor thinks it right to insert the following
original, with a translation.

Anno sexto Regis Johannis idem Rex construxit quoddam Cœnobium ordinis
Cisterciensis in Anglia, et Bellum Locum nominavit; quod quidem
Cœnobium tali occasione narratur ab eo factum. Quia enim idem Rex
versus Abbates, et alias personas ordinis Cisterciensis prænominatas,
supra modum, sine causa, est iratus, et eosdem non mediocriter per
ministros suos gravaret, ad quoddam Parliamentum, quod ipse apud
Lincolniam tenuit, Abbates dicti ordinis venerunt, si quo modo Regis
ejusdem gratiam et favorem potuissent aliquatenus invenire. Quibus
visis, sicut crudelis animi erat, præcepit suis ut dictos Abbates sub
pedibus equorum viliter conculcarent; Regis vero injustum tam
facinorosum et inauditum hactenus mandatum ab aliquo principe
Christiano, perficere nolentibus, hii Domini Abbates, jam fere
desperantes de Regia benignitate, ad sua hospitia festinanter
accesserunt. Nocte vero sequenti, cùm idem Rex Johannes in lecto suo
dormiret, ei quod coram quodam Judice, prædictis Abbatibus illuc
assistentibus, ductus fuerit: qui eisdem Abbatibus jusserat dictum
regem supra dorsum suum cum flagellis et virgis verberare: quam quidem
verberationem, mane vigilans, se sensisse dixit. Sompnium vero suum
cuidam personæ ecclesiasticæ de curia sua narravit, qui dixit ei, quod
Deus erga eum supra modum esset misericors, qui eum tam clementer et
paternè in præsenti seculo dignatus est corripere, et eidem sua
misteria revelare; et consuluit Regem ut pro Abbatibus dicti ordinis
velociter mitteret, et ab eisdem de reatu suo veniam humiliter
imploraret.

Rege siquidem acquiescente, pro eis, ut ad Regem venirent, missum est.
Quod audientes per nuncium Regis, putaverunt se ab Anglia fore
exterminandos; Deo tamen, qui suos non deserit, aliter disponente, cùm
nunc ad conspectum Regis venissent, indignationem suam quam ergo eos
habuit Rex remisit.

     “In the sixth year of his reign King John founded a certain
     monastery of the Cistercian order in England, and gave it the
     name of Beaulieu; and the following account is given of the cause
     which induced the King to found this abbey.

     “The King, without any just cause of offence, having taken the
     most violent and unbounded anger against the Abbats and others of
     the Cistercians, and having immoderately oppressed them through
     the medium of his officers, the Abbats of the said order came to
     a Parliament which the King held at Lincoln, to try if they might
     be able by some means to obtain a small share of the King’s grace
     and favour. But when the King saw them, he became so cruelly
     disposed towards them, as to order that the said Abbats should,
     in the most disgustful manner, be trodden under the horses’ feet;
     but his people being unwilling to execute a command so unjust, so
     atrocious, and hitherto unheard-of from any Christian prince,
     those Lord Abbats, now despairing of any kindness on the part of
     the King, hastily retired to their hostels. But in the following
     night, as the said King John lay sleeping on his bed, it seemed
     to him that he was brought before some judge, these Abbats
     standing by, whom the judge ordered to scourge him on the back
     with whips and rods; and when the King awoke in the morning, he
     declared that he actually felt the scourging. Having related his
     dream to a certain ecclesiastic of his court, this person assured
     him that God had been merciful to him beyond measure, by deigning
     thus kindly and paternally to correct him in this present life,
     and by revealing to him his mysteries; and he advised the King to
     send immediately for the Abbats of this order, and humbly to
     implore from them the pardon of his offence.

     “The King consenting, a message was sent to them that they should
     come to the King; which they hearing from the messenger, thought
     that they should be banished from England: but God, who never
     deserts his servants, disposed things otherwise; so that when
     they came into the King’s presence, he put away the anger which
     he had entertained against them.”

There is not any trace of the advowson of the vicarage having belonged
to this splendid abbey, which afforded sanctuary to Queen Margaret and
Perkin Warbeck. It is now possessed either by Mr. Pascoe, the present
incumbent, or by his family.

Mr. Lysons has given the descents and alienation of various manors or
farms of little general interest.

  St. Keven measures 8792 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         10,433    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                         1,310   17    0
  Population, {in 1801, in 1811, in 1821, in 1831,
              {   2104     2242     2505     2437
    giving an increase of about 16 per cent. in 30 years.
  The Rev. James Pascoe was instituted to the vicarage in
    1817.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

There are few spots that have excited greater geological interest than
the serpentine tract of the Lizard, and no part of it will be found
more instructive than this parish.

By far the greater part of St. Kevern rests on magnesian rocks; but
north of a line drawn from Porthalla, nearly due west to Goonhilly
Downs, the rocks belong to the calcareous series. The latter rocks may
be seen on the coast from Porthalla to the Nare Point, and will be
found to resemble the series between Gorran and the Dodman Point. On
the left side of Porthalla Cove the blue slate abounds in veins and in
irregular nodules of calcspar; and at low-water-mark a more compact
variety is exposed, which evidently forms the passage into the black
limestone, loose fragments of which are sometimes found on the shore.
In a small creek within the Nare near Bostowda, is a large patch of
conglomerate, the pebbles and fragments of which have been derived
from the rocks which line the banks of the river Hellas as high up as
Gweek; but which bear no resemblance to the rock of the immediate
vicinity. This is the most decided instance of a fragmentary rock in
Cornwall.

The hollow occupied by the little stream which discharges itself at
Porthalla divides the calcareous shale from a rock of totally
different nature, videlicet serpentine, several varieties of which
form the neck of land stretching thence to Dranna Point.

At Porthoustock a glossy lamellar rock, already noticed as joining the
serpentine at Cadgwith, forms each side of the cove; but here, on
proceeding to the Manacles Point it may be seen passing into diallage
rock: the latter extends so far as Coverack, and also inland to the
foot of Goonhilly Downs. At Coverack the diallage rock appears to pass
into serpentine; but here again, as at Porthalla, the junction is a
concrete. The varieties of serpentine near Coverack Pier are numerous,
and several of them may be seen passing into each other, which in
other parts of the Lizard district form large and apparently
independent masses. From Coverack to Kennick Cove the cliffs are very
bold, and display different kinds of serpentine and diallage rocks,
and at Blockhead a large stratum of indurated steatite, beautifully
marked with brown arborescent figures on a yellow ground. At Kennick
Cove, red and olive green serpentine, abounding in scales of diallage,
and traversed by numerous veins of asbestos, talc, and calcareous
spar, are exposed to view on a grand scale; and at Gwinter, a little
north of the cove, diallage rock is accompanied by layers of beautiful
violet-coloured jade, or compact felspar, containing large plates of
diallage as metalloide as at Coverack.

It may be noticed here, that all the uncultivated land extending over
serpentine formation, is clothed with the most beautiful of European
heaths; the Erica Vagans of Linnæus, so named on account of its being
found in various parts of the world on particular spots. Hudson named
it “Multiflora” from its splendid inflorescense; and Dr. Withering,
with some others, didyma, with reference to double antheræ on each
flower. This heath bounds itself almost within a yard to the limits of
the magnesian earths.




ST. KEW.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Trigg, and hath upon the north Endellyan,
east St. Eath, south St. Mabyn, west Egleshayle and Minver. In the
Domesday Tax, 20 William I. 1087, this parish was rated by the name of
Lan-guit, or Lan-cuit; that is to say, the Church or Temple Wood, or a
church or temple in a wood; not unsuitable to the former circumstances
thereof, surrounded with copse trees and oak woods; from whence it
appears here was an endowed church or temple of that name before the
Norman Conquest, implied in the word Lan. In the Inquisitions of the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the value of Cornish benefices
1294, it was rated by the name of Lan-owe, i. e. my Church or Temple,
or the Egge Church or Temple, for owe is an egg, in decanatu de Minor
Trigshire viii_l._ xiii_s._ iiii_d._ Vicar ejusdem xl_s._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition 1501, by the name of St. Kuet, i. e. holy, sacred, or
consecrated wood, 19_l._ 10_s._ The patronage, formerly in the priory
of Bodman, who endowed it, now Tregagle. The incumbent Nation; the
rectory or sheafe in possession of Tregagle; and the parish rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax 1696, by the name of St. Kewe 356_l._
15_s._ 10_d._

The manor and barton of Lanew in this parish, was formerly the lands
of the Beavills of Gwarnack or Killygarth; by one of whose heirs, as I
am informed, it came in marriage to the Grenvills of Stowe; and was
entailed, together with the barton of Bryn, and other lands, upon the
issue of the said Beavill, by Grenvill to be begotten.

Now it happened, tempore Charles I., that Sir Bevill Grenvill, being
much encumbered with the debts of his ancestors, in order to free the
same, sold for a valuable consideration this manor of Lanow and barton
of Bryn to William Noye, Esq. Attorney-general to King Charles I. the
which William Noye and his heirs quietly enjoyed the same for about
thirty years’ space, till King Charles II. returned from his exile
beyond the seas, and was restored to his dominions 1660; at which time
Sir John Grenvill, Knt. afterwards created Earl of Bath, (son of the
said Sir Bevill Grenvill) then also in exile with the said King beyond
the seas, came back to his native country with the said King; and some
time after delivered leases of ejectment, on writs of ejection, firme
formedon, or right, to the tenants of Humphrey Noye, Esq. then in
possession thereof, son of the said Attorney-general Noye, and brought
down a venire facias and trial for the same, at Lanceston assizes,
where, on the issue, the verdict passed for the said Earl of Bath; and
after judgment was entered up and recorded thereupon, writs for
possession were sued forth, and his lordship became seised of those
lands, and forced the tenants thereof to double their accustomed rent,
on condition of holding their leases. Afterwards Noye’s son aforesaid,
files his bill in chancery, suggesting the wrong he had received by
this verdict at law, whereby he lost his lands and purchase money,
which matter coming to a hearing on bill and answer, an issue was
directed out of Chancery to try once more this title at common law, on
which Noye proved Sir Beavill Grenvill to be tenant in tail for those
lands, and that he levying a fine thereon, _come ceo qui il eit de son
done_, according to due form of law, with deeds declaring the same to
be for the use of the said William Noye, his heirs and assigns for
ever, that was a sufficient dock of the entail, and bar to the son and
heir of the said Sir Beavill Grenvill, whereupon the sense and
judgment of the Court then was, that according to law the verdict must
be for Noye: as accordingly it then passed. Notwithstanding which, a
cross bill was filed by the Earl of Bath against Noye, about the
premises, praying a writ of injunction for stopping further
proceedings at common law; whereupon his lordship still kept
possession, and Noye grew weary of this controversy, who, otherwise,
was a man much depressed with debt, and therefore an unequal contester
with the then great Earl of Bath; wherefore he sold his title to those
lands in dispute to Mr. Christopher Davies, of Burnewall in Buryan,
who revived Noye’s drooping case and title to the premises, and
delivered ejectments to the Earl of Bath’s tenants, then in possession
thereof, and accordingly brought down a trial at Lanceston upon that
plea and demise, tempore James II., when it was manifest his lordship
relied more on his privilege as a Peer or Baron of this Realm than the
right or justice of the merits of his case, for he served all the
council, officers, and attornies of the court at that assizes with
writs of privilege; so that no person was permitted to speak or act
publicly on the part or title of Noye or Davies; but the case or trial
was immerged or was swallowed up without due course or form of law, so
that Mr. Davies was only permitted to plead his case himself, which he
did with so much judgment, sense, law, and equity, as the Court
admired at it, being no lawyer. But, alas! he wanted instruction in
the grand point in such cases, to have cried out a merger or emerger,
and the verdict must have been for him or Noye the second time.

After which bad success, and for that Mr. Davies was threatened to be
sued on the statute of _scandalum magnatum_, for words said to be
spoken by him reflective on his lordship’s honour and reputation, he
was terrified into a composition or agreement with the said Earl, by
the end of Hilary term then next ensuing, for the consideration of
500_l._ to levy a fine _sur cognizance de droit_, with proclamation on
those lands, with deeds declaring the uses thereof to be only to the
proper use and behoof of the said Earl of Bath, his heirs and assigns
for ever, as accordingly was performed, and so this controversy ended.
But, alas! when too late it appeared further, that when Mr. Davies had
sold his title to this manor of Lanow as aforesaid, that there were
two tenements of Mr. Noye’s paternal estate whilst he was in
possession thereof, after his purchase from Grenvill, that he had
annexed to the said manor, situate in this parish, and worth 900_l._,
which Mr. Davies ignorantly debarred himself of, to his greater loss.
See Withell parish for Bryn, the lands of Bevill and Grenvill.

Bo-Kelly in this parish was the dwelling of the genteel family
surnamed Carn-sew, i. e. dry, sterile, or barren spar-stone, or rock;
perhaps so called from the local place of Carnsew in Mabe, altogether
under such circumstances; otherwise Mr. Carew tells us the name of
those gentlemen was Carn-deaw, i. e. black spar-stone or rock. William
Carnsew of this house was sheriff of Cornwall 18 Edward IV.; William
Carnsew was Sheriff of Cornwall 3 Henry VIII.

Richard Carnsew, Esq. afterwards knighted, was Sheriff of Cornwall 17
Charles I. 1642, whose heir George Carnsew, as I am told, sold it to
Tregagle, and is now by lease in possession of John Nicholls, of
Trewane, Esq. The two only daughters and heirs of Sir Richard Carnsew,
of Tregarne, were married to Prideaux, of Fewborough, and Godolphin of
the younger house, whose arms were, Sable, a goat passant Argent,
attired Or.

Tre-havar-ike, alias Tre-ar-ike, gave name and original to an old
family of gentlemen, from thence surnamed de Trehauarike, whose sole
inheritrix was married to Cavall, tempore Henry VII. who, out of a
supposed allusion to this name, as appears from the glass windows of
this house, gave a calf for their arms, viz. Argent, a calf passant
Gules; whereas Leugh is a calf in British-Cornish, and Cavall is a
bee-hive, cradle, or flasket. They gave also, Azure, three sails of a
ship Argent; for that, as tradition saith, one of this family was
admiral of a squadron of ships at sea, under King Henry VI. against
the French; finally, about the year 1612, the two sole daughters and
heirs of those Cavalls were married to Vivian, of Trenowth in St.
Colomb, and Hore of Trenowth in St. Ewan. Upon the division of
Cavall’s lands, this barton and manor fell to Vivian’s share, whose
grandson Thomas Vivian, Esq. sold this barton to John Peter, of
Treater, gentleman, for 2,100_l._; and the manor to other persons, now
in possession thereof, about the year 1700.

At the top of those lands is a field called the Dower Park, i. e. the
water field, where a spring or pool of water commonly stands, which
gives the spring, or original of the aforesaid riveret of water, from
whence Trehavarike is denominated.

At Tregeare in this parish, and Resurra in St. Minver, was the seat of
the Penkivells, gentlemen of ancient descent, and heretofore of great
revenues, now comparatively extinct.

Pen-pons in this parish, now Pen-pont, synonymous words, signifies the
head bridge, or the bridge at the head or top of the sea in this
place, according to the natural and artificial circumstances thereof,
which was the voke lands of an ancient and extensive manor, privileged
with the jurisdiction of a court leet before the Norman Conquest; for
by the name of Penpont it was rated in the Domesday Tax 20 William I.
1087; from whence was denominated an ancient family of gentlemen now
extinct, surnamed Penpons, whose sole inheritrix was married to
Arundell of Tolverne, tempore Queen Mary, from whose heirs and assigns
it came to Cole and Arscott of Devon, and others, now in possession
thereof. By the inquisition 12 Edward III. it was rated for twenty-one
Cornish acres, before the judges Solomon de Ross and others, at
Lanceston, that is to say, 1260 statute acres. I take the tenure of
this manor to be either customary or copyhold lands; near which is
still extant Chappell Amble, or Ambhull, i. e. the dull, blockish, or
ignorant chapel or chaplain, a free chapel, where the Bishop never
visited.

In this parish at Middle Amble is the dwelling of Jonathan Webber,
Gent. (id est, in Saxon, a weaver, so called from his first ancestor,
who was of that trade or occupation,) who married Williams, and giveth
for his arms, Gules, on a chevron engrailed Or, charged with three
annulets or round plates Azure, pierced in the middle, Or, between
three round plates or platters, two in chief and one in the base,
Argent. This family, as it branched downwards to the year 1640, had
married with Mathew of the said parish of St. Kew, who gave for his
arms, Sable, a crane Argent, legged and beaked Gules; also with
Prewbody and Polwhele. This arms of Webber, consisting of four colours
in its field and in its charge, is a ridiculous or contemptible
bearing, as heralds tell us all such bearings are.

Note further that Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, A. D. 1602,
tells us, p. 55, that John, the son of Thomas, living at Pendarves,
took up the name of John Thomas Pendarves, and that Richard his
younger brother took up the name of Richard Thomas Pendarves; and that
Trengone, living at Nance, took up the name of Nance; and Bonython,
living at Carclew in Milor, took up the name of Carclew; and for the
same reason two brothers of the Thomases, living at Carnsew in Mabe,
another at Roscrow in Milor or Gluvias, took up the names of Carnsew
and Roscrow; as did also one of them living at Caweth in Mabe, take up
the name of Caweth; and in further testimony thereof, give one and the
same coat armour as Thomas did, viz. in a field Argent, a chevron
between three talbots Sable, though Pendarves gives a different arms
from that of Thomas. See Cambourne. Query, whether Carnsew of Bokelly
does not derive his name from Carnsew? i. e. dry rock, in Mabe parish.


TONKIN.

This parish takes its present name from the patron saint Kew, which,
says the author of the English Dictionary, 8vo. London, 1691, is
certainly the same with Kebius the Briton. The impropriator of the
sheaf and patron of the vicarage, is at present Robert Croker, Esq. by
purchase from Mr. John Tregeagle. The incumbent, Mr. Edward Stephens,
Mr. Croker’s nephew.

The ancient name of this parish was Lanow.


THE EDITOR.

If Saint Kebius is really the patron of this parish, and has given it
his name somewhat disguised in the sound of St. Kew, he has the
unusual felicity of being honoured in his own country. Doctor Borlase
states, on the authority of Archbishop Usher, (Antiquities of
Cornwall, 2d ed. p. 369.) “About the middle of the fourth century,
Solomon Duke of Cornwall seems to have been a Christian; for his son
Kebius was ordained a Bishop by Hilarius, Bishop of Poictiers, in
France; and afterwards returned into his own country to exercise that
high function.”

Saint Kebius, however, stands in the Roman Calendar on the 26th of
April; but the parish feast is kept (I believe) on the nearest Sunday
to the 25th of July, the day of Saint James the Apostle.

This parish is one of the most fertile in Cornwall, as well for corn
as for grass. The church is situated in a pleasant valley; and near it
is Skinden, for many years the residence of Mr. Joseph Bennet, a
clergyman, but without preferment; and after his decease, of Mr.
Clode, a native of Camelford, who having risen to the situation of a
major in the East India Company’s army, returned with a fortune, and
purchased this place; it now belongs to his sister Mrs. Braddon.

The principal seat in St. Kew was in former times Trewane, the
residence of an ancient and opulent family the Nichollses. The house,
partly converted into a farmhouse and partly in ruins, appears in a
style of grandeur quite unusual in the houses of this county. It is
believed to have been built before the Civil Wars. These four descents
are recorded in the Heraldic Visitation of 1620.

John Nicholls――His son and heir, John Nicholls, married Catharine,
daughter of John Trowbrigge, of Trowbridge in Devon.――Their son John
Nicholls married to Elizabeth Fortescue, of Fallowpit in Devon;――and
their son, the fourth John Nicholls, aged seven years, with other
children. The granddaughter, or great-granddaughter, from these last
recorded, became an heiress possessed of the whole property, and
married Mr. Glynn, of Glynn; but being left a widow, and childless by
the death of her only son, she devised her estate in certain portions,
to Mr. Glynn, of Helston, with the whole of Trewane; and to Mr. Bennet
her steward, father of the Rev. Joseph Bennet, who built or improved
Skisden. The arms of Nicholls, of Trewane, were, Sable, three pheons
Argent.

The rectorial tithes of this parish belonged to the priory of Plympton
in Devonshire, and now belong to Molesworth of Pencarrow. The advowson
has passed by purchase with their other property, from Mahon to Pitt
and Glanville.

The church contains some monuments and painted glass. Mr. Hals has
given the details of a law suit, which may tend to reconcile the
admirers of olden times to those in which they live; nor can the
Editor, who is the descendant and heir-at-law of Attorney-general
Noye, and of his son Colonel Humphrey Noye, be supposed to entertain
much respect for the memory of the Earl of Bath.

  St. Kew measures 6343 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           8598    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1029    6    0
  Population, {in 1801, in 1811, in 1821, in 1831,
              {  1095     1113     1218     1316
    giving an increase of 20 per cent. in 30 years.
  The Rev. John Pomeroy was presented to the vicarage
    in 1777 by W. Pitt, Esq.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Doctor Boase says of the geology of this parish, that the northern
part resembles Endellion, and that the southern part is similar to
Egloshale and Helland.




KILKHAMPTON.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Stratton, and hath upon the north
Morwinstow, west St. George’s channel, south Stratton and Poughill,
east part of the county of Devon. For the modern name, it is derived
from the church, compound of Saxon-British Kirk or Kilk-hampton, i. e.
church home or habitation town, answerable to church town in English.
In the Domesday Tax, 20 William I. (1087), this district was taxed
under the jurisdiction of Orcett, of which more under. In the
Inquisition made into the value of Cornish Benefices, in decanatu de
Major Triggshire, ecclesia de Kilkhampton was rated xiiii_l._ xiii_s._
viii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, 26_l._ 3_s._ 10½_d._; the
patronage in the Earl of Bath; the incumbent Corringdon; and the
parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 352_l._ 10_s._

Stowe for many ages hath been the seat of that famous and knightly
family now Earls of Bath.

[Mr. Hals goes on with a long account of this family in the early
Norman times, apparently without much authority, and quite unconnected
with Cornwall.

I shall therefore select particular passages, more especially as a
genealogy in sufficient detail is given by Mr. Lysons.]

It appears that the Grenvilles settled near Bideford, where they are
stated to have held knights’ fees under the Crown, and also under the
honour of Gloucester; and Sir Theobald Grenville in the latter part of
the reign of King Edward the Third, was the principal founder and
promoter of building the bridge at Bideford; John Grandison was then
Lord Bishop of Exeter, who caused it to be proclaimed in his
Cathedral, and throughout all other churches in Devon and Cornwall,
that all persons whatsoever that would promote or encourage such a
work should partake of all spiritual blessings for ever. Sir Richard
Gurnard or Gurney was then parish priest of Bideford, who it seems was
admonished in his sleep to undertake this work, as Bishop Bronscomb
was to build Glasney College in Cornwall; the Goldneys, Octanetts, and
most other families of note in Cornwall and Devon (as Risdon’s
Manuscript informs us) were benefactors to this work, which bridge was
finished tempore Richard II., assisted by a bull of indulgencies from
Rome.

John Grenvill of Bideford, that married Burghert, was the first
Sheriff of Devon of this family, 15 Richard II., son of Sir Theobald.
Thomas Grenvill, that married Gilbert, was the first Sheriff of
Cornwall of this family, 21 Edward IV., 1480, also the first of Henry
VII., 1485, and probably the first of those gentlemen that settled at
Stowe, for at such time as he was Sheriff of Cornwall, 21 Edward IV.,
one George Grenvill was Sheriff of Devon.

One Robert Grenvill was Sheriff of Cornwall the 2nd, 10th, and 14th
Henry VIII. Richard Grenvill was Sheriff of Cornwall 36 Henry VIII.
Richard Grenvill was Sheriff of Devon 18 of Elizabeth. Bernard
Grenvill was Sheriff of Devon 38 of Elizabeth.

Roger, younger son of Sir Richard Grenvill that married Bonvill of
Killigarth, who in the Mary Rose frigate, 37 Henry VIII., 1545,
commanded by Sir George Carew, Knight, with more than four hundred men
besides, after they had for several days fought the French fleet off
the Isle of Wight under the command of the Lord Dambolt, Admiral of
France, with great victory and success, unfortunately afterwards as
the said ship passed out of the harbour of Portsmouth into the sea, by
the neglect and carelessness of the gunner and mariners, one of which
had left the cannon or ordnance untrigged or chained, and the latter
having left the under port or gun-holes open, by means whereof, when
the ship turned upon her lee, the guns fell all on that side of the
ship and bore the port-holes under water, so that the sea in an
instant abundantly flowing in through those port-holes filled her with
water, whereof she sunk into the deep (in the sight of King Henry
himself), whereby the captain and all his men were suddenly and
violently drowned in the sea.

Of his father, Sir Richard Grenvill, the elder, thus speaks Mr. Carew
in his Survey of Cornwall, “he interlaced his home magistracy with
martial employments abroad, whereof the King testified his good liking
by his liberality.” Again, his son, the second Sir Richard, after his
travel and following the wars under the Emperor Maximilian against the
Turks, for which his name is recorded by sundry foreign writers, and
his undertaking to people Virginia and Ireland, made so glorious a
conclusion in her Majesty’s ship the Revenge, of which he had charge
as Captain, and of the whole fleet as Vice-Admiral, that it seemed
thereby, when he found none other to compare withal in his life, he
strived through a virtuous envy to exceed it in his death; a
victorious loss for the realm, and of which the Spaniard may say, with
Pyrrhus, that many such conquests would beget his utter overthrow.
Lastly, his son John took hold of every martial occasion that was
ministered him, until, in service against her Highness’ enemies, under
the command of Sir Walter Raleigh, the ocean became his bed of honour.
Thus Mr. Carew, page 62. See also Baker’s Chronicle in the latter end
of the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Beville Grenvill, son of Bernard, by Beville’s heir of Killigarth
in Talland, was a gentleman of such urbanity, valour, and integrity in
those parts, that my commendations cannot make the least addition
thereto, nor I think that of a more florid or abler pen; who, as his
duty obliged, engaged himself, his life and fortune, on the part and
behalf of King Charles I.; and being first a horse Colonel in the
militia for this County, was afterwards obliged to head or lead those
soldiers he had raised in Cornwall, by virtue of the King’s
Commission, under command of Sir Ralph Hopton, Knight, his General in
the west, from Launceston into Somersetshire, at a place called
Lansdowne, five miles from Bristol, where Hopton with the King’s army
met and gave battle to the Parliament forces under command of Sir
William Waller; in which engagement Sir Beville Grenvill, Knight,
charging boldly in the head of his troop, was unfortunately slain, the
5th of July 1643.

Orcot, now Orchard, in this parish, was the jurisdiction under which
Kilkhampton was taxed in Domesday Roll, 1087; from which place, I take
it, was denominated the family surnamed de Orchard, now in possession
thereof; particularly Charles Orchard, gentleman, steward to Sir John
Rolle of Stevenston. This gentleman was sheriff of Cornwall about the
year 1703.

Mr. Hals’ concluding part of this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has merely copied from Mr. Hals.


THE EDITOR.

The following extract from Mr. Lysons’s Cornwall is the best account
that the Editor can give of the distinguished family of Grenville.

The manor of Kilkhampton is supposed to have belonged to the Grenville
family from nearly the time of the Conquest; Dugdale says, that they
were seated here in the reign of William Rufus. Richard de Grenville,
who came over with William the Conqueror, is said in the pedigrees of
the family to have been a younger brother of Robert Fitzhamon, Earl of
Carbill, Lord of Thurigny and Grenville, in France and Normandy, and
to have been lineally descended from Rollo, Duke of Normandy. It is on
record that Richard de Grenville held certain knights’ fees at
Bideford, in Devonshire, in the reign of Henry II. We have not found
any record of the Grenville possessions at Kilkhampton of an earlier
date than the _quo warranto_ roll before mentioned; but it appears
that it had at that time been long in the family: they continued to
reside at Stowe, in this parish, for many generations, and frequently
served the office of sheriff for the county. William Grenville, or
Grenfield (as the name was at that early period generally written),
son of Sir Theobald, became archbishop of York, and distinguished
himself as an able statesman: he died in 1315. Sir Richard Grenville,
son of Roger, (who was himself a captain in the navy, and lost his
life, as Carew tells us, in the unfortunate Mary-Rose) was a
celebrated military and naval commander in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. He first distinguished himself in the wars under the
Emperor Maximilian against the Turks, for which his name is recorded
by several foreign writers. In the year 1591, being then Vice-Admiral
of England, he was sent in the Revenge, with a squadron of seven
ships, to intercept the Spanish galleons; when, falling in with the
enemy’s fleet, consisting of fifty-two sail, near the Terceira
Islands, he repulsed them fifteen times in a continued fight, till his
powder was all spent; his ship, which sunk before it arrived in port,
was reduced to a hulk, and himself covered with wounds, of which he
died two days afterwards, on board the vessel of the Spanish
commander. Sir Richard’s grandson was the brave and loyal Sir Beville
Grenville. This distinguished officer was one of king Charles’s
generals in the West, and shared the glories of the successful
compaign in Cornwall, in the autumn of 1642; in the summer of the
following year he lost his life at the battle of Lansdowne, near Bath.
Sir Richard Grenville, who had been created a Baronet in 1631, was,
after his brother’s death, made General of all the King’s forces in
the West. He was an active and zealous officer, and so particularly
obnoxious to the Parliamentary party, that he was perpetually the
subject of abuse to their journalists, who seldom spoke of him but by
the appellation of _Skellum_ Grenville. During the dissensions between
the civil power and the military in 1645, Sir Richard Grenville was
superseded and imprisoned by the advice of Sir Edward Hyde, afterwards
Earl of Clarendon. That noble author gives a very unamiable character
of Sir Richard, who is represented as having been in the highest
degree oppressive, tyrannical, and unprincipled; but other writers
attribute much of this to the personal enmity which subsisted between
them. Sir Richard Grenville died, in reduced circumstances, at Ghent,
in the year 1658, leaving no male issue; the title became extinct. Sir
John Grenville, son of the brave Sir Beville, succeeded to the
Kilkhampton estates: at a very early age he had a command in his
father’s regiment, and was left for dead in the field at Tewkesbury.
He was appointed Governor of Scilly Islands when they revolted from
the Parliament, and was one of the chief instruments in effecting the
restoration of King Charles II. He gave the living of Kilkhampton to
Nicholas Monk, and employed him to influence his brother (the General)
in favour of the exiled Monarch; having succeeded in his negociations,
he had the satisfaction of being the bearer of the King’s letters to
General Monk and to the Parliament. In April 1661 Sir John Grenville
was created Lord Grenville of Kilkhampton and Bideford, Viscount
Lansdowne, and Earl of Bath. On the death of his grandson, under age,
in 1711, these titles became extinct; and the Kilkhampton estates
passed to his aunt and coheiress Grace Grenville, who married George
Lord Carteret, and was afterwards (being then a widow) by King George
the First created Countess of Granville, with remainder to her son
John, who inherited that title and the Kilkhampton estate. On the
death of Robert the second Earl of Granville, in 1776. that title
became extinct, and the Kilkhampton estate passed, under his will, to
his nephew Henry Frederick Thynne, second son of Lord Viscount
Weymouth, who had married his sister Louisa. Mr. Thynne was created
Lord Carteret in 1784, and is the present possessor of Kilkhampton;
the remainder of which, as well as the title of Carteret, is vested in
Lord George Thynne, second son of the Marquis of Bath.

John Grenville, Earl of Bath, in the reign of Charles II. built a
magnificient mansion at Stowe in this parish, of which scarcely a
vestige remains. It stood on an eminence, overlooking a well-wooded
valley; but not a tree near it, says Dr. Borlase, to shelter it from
the north-west. That writer speaks of it as by far the noblest house
in the west of England, and says that the kitchen-offices, fitted up
for a dwelling-house, made no contemptible figure. It is a singular
circumstance, that the cedar wainscot which had been brought out of a
Spanish prize, and used by the Earl of Bath for fitting up the chapel
in this mansion, was purchased by Lord Cobham at the time of its
demolition (the house being then sold piecemeal), and applied to the
same purpose at Stowe, the magnificent seat of the noble family of
Grenville in Buckinghamshire, where it still remains. Defoe, in his
Tour through Great Britain, speaking of Stowe in Cornwall, says that
the carving of the chapel was the work of Michael Chuke, and not
inferior to Gibbons.

Ilcombe, now a farm-house belonging to Lord Carteret, is described by
Norden as the residence of a younger branch of the Grenvilles.

Alderscombe, formerly a seat of the Orchards, is the property of the
Rev. Thomas Hooper Morrison, nephew of the late Paul Orchard, Esq. of
Hartland Abbey.

Elmsworthy, some time a seat of the Westlakes, is now a farm house,
the property of Mr. Galsworthy, of Hartland. The last of the Westlakes
died in very indigent circumstances about the year 1772, having been
reduced to the situation of a parish pauper. It is a singular
circumstance, that he was twice pricked for Sheriff after he was an
inhabitant of the poor-house. In the parish church are monuments of
the Grenville family, and memorials of the Orchards of Alderscombe,
the Westlakes of Elmsworthy, and the Waddons of Tonacombe in
Morwinstow. On the monument of Sir Beville Grenville, which is
surrounded by military trophies, is the following inscription: “Here
lyes all that was mortal of the most noble and truly valiant Sir
Beville Grenville, of Stowe in the county of Cornwall, Earl of Corbill
and Lord of Thorigny and Granville in France and Normandy, descended
in a direct line from Robert, second son of the warlike Rollo, first
Duke of Normandy; who, after having obtained divers signal victories
over the Rebels in the West, was at length slain with many wounds at
the battle of Lansdowne July 5, 1643. He married the most virtuous
lady, Grace, daughter of Sir George Smith, of the county of Devon, by
whom he had many sons, eminent for their loyalty and firm adherence to
the Crown and Church; and several daughters, remarkable examples of
true piety. He was indeed an excellent person, whose activity,
interest, and reputation was the foundation of what had been done in
Cornwall, and his temper and affection so public that no accident
which happened could make any impressions on him, and his example kept
others from taking any thing ill, or at least seeming to do so; in a
word, a brighter courage and a gentler disposition were never married
together to make the most cheerful and innocent conversation. Vide
Lord Clarendon’s History of the Rebellion.

“To the immortal memory of his renowned grandfather this monument was
erected by the Right Honorable George Lord Lansdowne, Treasurer of the
Household to Queen Anne, and one of Her Majesty’s most Honorable Privy
Council, &c. in the year 1714.

  “Thus slain thy valiant ancestor did lye,
  When his one bark a navy did defy,
  When now encompass’d round the victor stood,
  And bath’d his pinnace in his conquering blood,
  ’Till, all his purple current dried and spent,
  He fell, and made the waves his monument.
  Where shall the next famed Grenville’s ashes stand?
  Thy grandsire fills the seas, and thou the land.
                               MARTIN LLEWELLIN.”
    Vide Oxford University Verses, printed 1643.

Sir Beville Granville was forty-eight years of age at the time of his
death, as appears by the following record of his birth in the parish
register at Kilkhampton:

“Bevell, the sonne of the worshipful Bernarde Greynville, Esquire, was
borne and baptized at Brinn in Cornwall, Ao. Dni. 1595.”

In the margin, “Marche 1595, borne the 23d day, baptized the 25th day
of Marche.”

His brother Sir Richard’s baptism is thus entered, “Richard, the son
of Barnard Granevile, Esq. baptized 26 June 1600.”

Lord Carteret is patron of the rectory of Kilkhampton. In the
registers of the see of Exeter, mention is made of a chapel at
Brightley in this parish, dedicated to St. Catharine.――Thus far from
Mr. Lysons.

All the accounts and traditions of Sir Beville Granville represent him
as a hero bordering on romance, as the rival of Sir Philip Sidney, and
of Lord Herbert of Cherbury. He fell, however, into all the political
errors of that age, by attaching himself to the existing form of
Government, not because it appeared, on the whole, to prove most
conducive to human happiness, but from some fanciful, superstitious,
or blasphemous analogy it was supposed to bear with the Divine
administration of the universe. Then he concurred with those who
thought it expedient and right to destroy the resemblance, by limiting
that which, on the supposition, should exist without restraint or
control; and entertaining that opinion, he nevertheless endeavoured to
prove by arguments, and still more powerfully by his arms at Stratton
and at Bath, that no resistance could in any case be lawfully
exercised against the individual who happened to hold the chief
magistracy from the accident of his birth. Such glaring inconsistencies
were, however, almost obscured by the splendour of undaunted courage,
of disinterested generosity, and, by adherence to principles honestly
entertained, however erroneous or contradictory.

It would be unfair to the memory of Sir Beville Granville not to
insert his letter to Sir John Trelawny, recently printed in the
Memorials of John Hampden, 2 vols. 8vo., by George Grenville Nugent
Temple, Lord Nugent, vol. 2, p. 195.

     Most Honourable Sir,

     I have in many kinds had trial of your nobleness, but in none
     more than in this singular expression of your kind care and love.
     I give also your excellent Lady humble thanks for respect unto my
     poor Woman, who hath been long a faithful much obliged servant of
     your Ladyes. But Sir! for my journey, it is fixed. I cannot
     contain myself within my doors, when the King of England’s
     standard waves in the field upon so just occasion. The cause
     being such as must make all those that die in it little inferior
     to martyrs. And for my own part, I desire to acquire an honest
     name, or an honourable grave. I never loved my life or ease so
     much as to shun such an occasion; which if I should, I were
     unworthy of the profession I have held, or to succeed those
     ancestors of mine, who have so many of them in several ages
     sacrificed their lives for their country. Sir, the barbarous and
     implacable enemy, notwithstanding His Majesty’s gracious
     proceedings with them, do continue their insolences and rebellion
     in the highest degree, and are united in a body of great
     strength; so as you may expect, if they be not prevented and
     mastered near their own homes, they will be troublesome in yours,
     and in the remotest places ere long.

     I am not without the consideration, as you lovingly advise, of my
     wife and family; and as for her, I must acknowledge, she hath
     ever drawn so evenly in the yoke with me, as she hath never prest
     before, or hung behind me, nor ever opposed or resisted my will.
     And yet truly I have not, in this or any thing else, endeavoured
     to walk in the way of power with her, but of reason; and though
     her love will submit to either, yet truly my respect will not
     suffer me to urge her with power, unless I can convince with
     reason. So much for that, whereof I am willing to be accomptable
     unto so good a friend.

     I have no suit unto you in mine own behalf, but for your prayers
     and good wishes; and that if I live to come home again, you would
     please to continue me in the number of your servants.

     I shall give a true relation unto my very noble friend Mr. Moyle,
     of your and his Aunt’s loving respects to him, which he hath good
     reason to be thankful for. And so I beseech God to send you and
     your noble family all health and happiness, and while I live I
     am, Sir,

     Your unfeigned loving and faithful servant,
                                         BEVILLE GRANVILLE.

With the death of Sir Beville Granville, in the moment of victory at
Lansdown, the splendour of this family seems to have fallen under a
temporary eclipse.

His brother is represented by Hyde, the partial historian of these
civil wars, as unworthy of the character supposed to distinguish
Cavaliers.

John Grenville, his eldest son, created Earl of Bath, appears to have
been rapacious and oppressive.

But all this was amply compensated by the subsequent conduct of his
son and heir Charles Grenville, who served with honour in the
continental wars, and participated with John Sobieski in the
preservation of Christendom under the walls of Vienna in 1683.

George Grenville, son of Barnard Grenville, brother to the first Earl
of Bath, is known to every one by his literary attainments and by his
talents for poetry. This gentleman had the honour of being elected
member for the county of Cornwall, with Mr. John Trevanion, after the
great contest of 1710, amidst shouts of

  Grenville and Trevanion as sound as a Bell,
  For the Queen, the Church, and Sacheverel:

In the following year an hereditary seat in Parliament was bestowed on
him, with the appellation of Lord Lansdown, and he was succeeded in
the representation of Cornwall by Sir Richard Vyvyan.

Lord Lansdown suffered imprisonment after the accession of George I.
and retired from public life. His genuine works in prose and verse
were collected in 2 vols. 4to., London 1732. He died, sine prole, in
1734.

The old house at Stowe was taken down by John Grenville the first Earl
of Bath, and a superb mansion erected in its place, partly, as it is
said, at the national expense; having the internal decorations suited
to the size and magnificence of the exterior; but soon after the
decease of his grandson in 1711, when the property passed into a
female line, this house was taken down and the materials of all kinds
sold.

It used to be said that almost every gentleman’s seat in Cornwall had
received embellishments from Stowe. Mr. Prideaux’ house at Padstow
received an entire staircase, and some carved wainscot has, by a
singular fate, found its way to Stowe, in Buckinghamshire.

Alderscombe, in this parish, was for many years held on lease for
lives by the family of Cottell.

Mr. Alexander Cottell, about the year 1720, having served his
clerkship in Penzance, as an attorney, married Sarah Phillips, one of
the daughters of Mr. Samuel Phillips, of Pendrea. There is a monument
to her memory in the church, stating her decease on the 7th of August,
1727, in her thirtieth year, with the arms of Cottell, Or, a bend Gu.
This gentleman married again and dissipated his whole property.

The church is one of the finest in Cornwall, containing splendid
monuments; and under, is a most spacious vault belonging to the
Glanville family.

It is perhaps worth noticing that here, while he served the curacy,
Mr. Hervey composed his Meditations among the Tombs.

Kilkhampton measures 7,234 statute acres.

  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          3,959    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           792    5    0
  Population, { in 1801,| in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    808  |    852   |    1,024 |   1,126
    giving an increase of 39 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. John Davis, presented by
    Lord Carteret in 1810.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

Doctor Boase says of the geology of this parish, that Kilkhampton is
entirely situated on the dunstone, which forms the substratum
throughout the north-eastern part of Cornwall.




LADOCK, COMMONLY PRONOUNCED LASSICK.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Ladock is in the hundred of Powder, and confines on the west to St.
Erme, on the north to St. Enodor, on the east to St. Stephan’s in
Branwell, on the south to St. Probus.

This parish takes its name from Saint Ladoca, whom I take to be an
Irish Saint; and probably she came over with St. Breage.

This parish is a rectory, valued in the King’s Books at £18. The
patronage in Kelland Courtenay, and Thomas Pitt, Esqrs. Governor Pitt,
grandfather of Mr. Thomas Pitt, purchased this alternate right of the
Lady Mahon, together with all the Mahon property in Cornwall. The
incumbent Mr. Wm. Wood.

The manor of Nansoath, in this parish, signifies the fat (i. e.
fertile) valley, the name being compounded of nans, a valley, and
soath or soa, fat, tallow, &c.

To the north of Nansoath is Hay. This was the seat of the Randyls, and
was sold to Mr. William Tregea, of Lambrigan, who did not keep it
long, but parted with it to Richard Bone, Gent. who dying without
being ever married, left it by will, with several other estates, to
his kinsman Richard Bone, Gent. who now lives there, and hath married
Anne, the daughter of Mr. John Andrew, of Trethurfe, by whom he has
issue. Mr. Randyll’s arms were, Gules, on a cross Argent, three
mullets pierced Sable. Mr. Bone’s are, Ermine, a fess indented Sable.

Joining with Hay is Boswaydel, usually called Boswidle, which I take
to signify a house in an open place, or one easy to be seen from.

The manor of Bedocke or Bessake. Francis Tregian, Esq. forfeited this
manor, with his other lands (see Probus). To the east of this is the
church and rectory house; and the manor of Trethurfe or Tretherf. This
was anciently, perhaps before the Norman Conquest, the seat of a very
eminent family of the same name, who gave for their arms, Azure, a
buck’s head cabouched Argent. John Tretherfe was one of the Knights
returned to Parliament for this county in the 15th year of King Henry
VI. Reginald Trethurf married Margery, the second daughter and coheir
of John St. Aubyn, Esq. by Catharine his wife, the daughter and heir
of Sir Robert Challons, of Challons Legh in Devonshire, as appears by
a bill in the Treasury, of 7 Henry VI.


THE EDITOR.

In the Taxation of Ecclesiastical Benefices by the Bishops of Lincoln
and Winchester, under the authority of Pope Nicholas, will be found:

                                   Taxatio.    Decima.
  Ecclesia de Sancto Ladoca        £6  0  0    0 12  0
  In Wolsey’s Valuation, Ladocke   18  0  0    1 16  0

Besides the church town there is one considerable village in this
parish called Bedock or Besock, after the manor of which it forms a
part.

Mr. Pitt not only acquired the alternate presentation to this rectory
by purchase from the family of Mahon, as is stated by Mr. Tonkin, but
also the manor of Ladock, which had previously belonged to the
Carminows and Courtenays. The barton of Trethurfe has passed by the
heiresses of Kelland Courtenay to the families of Poyntz and Boyle.
The barton of Nansaugh is the property and the residence of Mr.
Andrews.

Hay, noticed by Mr. Tonkin as belonging to Mr. Richard Bone, came by
purchase to the Hearles of Penryn, and in the division of the lands
belonging to that family, it has fallen to Mrs. Stephens, of Tregenna.

The manor of Bessake was acquired by Mr. Francis Tregian, son of the
gentleman from whom it had been seized, but soon afterwards it passed
by sale to the Arundells, from them by gift to the Moncktons, who have
added the name of Arundell; and finally Robert Monckton Arundell,
Viscount Galway, sold it in 1780 to the late Sir Christopher Hawkins.

The Rev. John Eliot, rector of this parish, and of Truro, who died in
1760, founded two exhibitions at Exeter College for young men from
Truro school.

The vale, extending from north to south quite across this parish, is
one of the most beautiful in Cornwall: it was, however, little known
beyond the immediate neighbourhood, till the line of road forming the
great communication from Falmouth, and the whole western part of the
county, with London, was carried through it in the year 1830. The
church and tower, which are handsome in themselves, stand on a
commanding situation, and are seen to great advantage from the new
road.

  Ladock measures 4,859 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
      returned to Parliament in 1815        4,566    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           310    2    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    542  |   651    |   806[8] |      761
    giving an increase of 40 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is entirely situated on rocks belonging to the slate
series; its northern corner, however, approaches very near to the
boundary of the granite.

Its different kinds of slates are the same as those of the adjacent
parishes of St. Enoder and St. Erme; the rocks of its northern and
eastern boundaries resembling those of St. Enoder, the southern part
corresponding to those of St. Erme.

Most of the vallies have been excavated for stream tin, and these have
yielded some of the largest pieces of gold that have been found in
Cornwall.


     [8] This parish presents a very singular anomaly in respect
     to its Population Return. It would obviously occur that the
     8 might possibly have stood for a 7 in the place of hundreds
     in the return for 1821; but that return at large, as printed
     by the House of Commons, has

     Families     Families      Other    Males.  Females.  In all.
     employed in  employed in  families.
     Agriculture. Trades, &c.
         90           19           15      418      388      806

     This gives however 6½ for each family.

     If the rate of increase had continued for the last ten
     years, as it did in the former twenty, the final number
     would have been 983, with an increase at the rate of 81 per
     cent. in 30 years.




LAMORAN.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lamoran is in the hundred of Powder, and hath on the west and north
St. Michael Penkivell; on the east Cornelly; on the south the river
Fale, between it and Ruan Lanyhorn.

The right name of this parish is Lan Morun, the church of St. Morun,
to whom it is dedicated; but as to who St. Morun was I must plead
ignorance, except that I believe him to have been one of those who
came from Ireland in the fifth century.

This parish is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book at £6. The
patronage is in Sir John Molesworth, in right of the manor of
Lanmoran, to which it belongs.

The incumbent Mr. Samuel Ley.

This little parish hath but one manor in it, and that is called by its
own name.


THE EDITOR.

In the valuation of Pope Nicholas the taxation is £1, the tenths
nothing.

This parish has but two villages, the Church Town and Tregenna.

The manor of Lamoran, including the whole parish, has passed through
various families; Halep and Trevenor, from that family by coheiresses
to Roscarrack and Chamond, then Vermans and Sparks, and Molesworths,
from whom by purchase, it passed to Boscawen. The advowson is an
appendage to the manor.

The church is said to be most curiously situated on the edge of the
river, and with a tower more venerable than itself, at a certain
distance from it.

The church has some monuments to the Vermans. Their old manor house is
fallen into decay.

  This parish measures 1130 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            895    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            25    3    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    78   |     94   |     93   |     96
    giving an increase of 23 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geology of this little parish is precisely the same as that of
Filley, of the lower part of Kea, and of other parishes situated
around the numerous creeks communicating with Falmouth harbour.

Present Rector, the Rev. William Curgerven, presented in 1803 by the
Earl of Falmouth.




LENDAWEDNACK, OR LANDEWEDNACK.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Landawednack lies in that part of the hundred of Kerrier which is
called Meneage. It hath to the west, south, and east, the English
Channel, to the north Ruan Major and Grade.

The name signifies the church of St. Wednack, or Wynnock; (although
Mr. Carew, I know not on what authority, calls it St. Landy,) to whom
is likewise dedicated Towednack, in the hundred of Penwith, and St.
Winnow. It is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book at £11. 16_s._
8_d._ The patronage in the heirs of George Robinson, Esq.

The manor of Lizard, so called from the famous Point of that name,
which is a part of it. This manor was one of those given to the Earl
of Morton.


THE EDITOR.

This parish has but two villages. The Church Town and an assemblage of
small houses near the Point, and called Lizard, or Lizard Town.

Mr. Lysons says, that the very extensive manor of Tretheves, Lucies,
and Rosswick, extends over a great part of this parish, and into Ruan
Minor and Grade: it belonged to the Carminows, then to the Reskymers,
and to Robinson, by whom it was sold in 1768 to Mr. Thomas Fonnereau,
after whose death it was purchased by the late Sir Christopher
Hawkins.

Mr. Fonnereau came into Cornwall as an adventurer, and chiefly for the
purpose of constructing Lighthouses on the Lizard Point, under one of
the improvident grants which were frequently made in those times.

A single lighthouse stands on St. Agnes Island at Scilly, and three,
forming a triangle, on the rocks of Guernsey. Two towers were
therefore built on the Lizard, that each Point might be distinct from
the others, and experience has proved their utility to be very great.
For many years after their construction the lights consisted of coal
fires in each lantern, after the manner of a smith’s forge, and urged
in a similar way by bellows; but the blowing could not be always
maintained, and when that had been intermitted for a short time the
lights nearly disappeared.

Since the expiration of the grant made to the first projector, the
affairs have been under the intelligent, scientific, and liberal
management of the Trinity House. They have substituted large Argand
lamps, each placed in the focus of a parabolic mirror, plated with
burnished silver; and these cast a continued and steady light, visible
in clear weather to the extremity of the horizon.

Latitude of the Lizard flagstaff 49° 57′ 55″.8; longitude west from
Greenwich 5° 11′ 17″.7. From the Trigonometrical Survey.

In Mr. Lax’s Table, the Western Light House is stated to have latitude
49° 57′ 44″, and longitude 5° 11′ 5″.

  This parish measures 1,843 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          1,187    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           126    4    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    244  |     303  |     387  |     406
    giving an increase of 66 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. H. T. Coulson, presented in
    1827 by Henry Coulson, Esq.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

By far the greater part of this parish is composed of serpentine,
which is generally of the red variety, with dark-coloured and shining
scales of diallage.

South of a line drawn east and west, a little north of the church,
across the peninsula of the Lizard, the rocks are for the most part
schistose, and are covered with a deep soil, which is exceedingly
productive.

The cliffs around this part of the parish are very interesting, and if
minutely scrutinized would probably throw some additional light on the
nature and position of the serpentine. To this end it would be
necessary to make the survey from the sea, which could only be
effected occasionally, and under very favourable circumstances.

At Perranbonse Cove, near the church, the slate is a variety of
schistose diallage rock, such as has been already described at
Cadgwith.

Near the lighthouses the cliff is formed of a glossy decomposing
talcose slate, which has been called by some geologists Micaceous
schist, but talc appears to be the characteristic mineral, as it is
present in a distinct form throughout the veins, with nodules of
quartz abounding in this slate.

At Hensall Cove the blue slate is much intermixed with calcareous spar
in various forms, resembling the slate adjoining the calc shists, and
blue limestones at Veryan, Padstow, and some other parts of Cornwall.

       *     *     *     *     *

The Editor would take the liberty of adding that in this parish veins
of steatite run through the serpentine formation; and that
considerable quantities have been raised by the late Mr. Wedgwood from
some veins larger than the others, and near the cliff. The soft and
unctuous qualities of this substance gave it the popular name of soap
rock. Thin veins of native copper traverse also the serpentine
formation; but never in sufficient quantities to bear the expense of
mining. In some places specimens of semitransparent serpentine are
found shot through by branches of native copper, forming what has been
termed dendrites.

At Kynans Cove the assemblage of rocks possesses such an extraordinary
degree of beauty and magnificence as to render it one of the spots
most worthy of attention on the whole coast. The interest excited by
the general effect is heightened, on a more close inspection, by
natural caverns, and the intervals between the rocks are perpetually
varied in their appearance by the swell and by the subsidence of waves
from the sea.

This spot possesses further interest to a botanist by the production
of some rare plants. The asparagus officinalis, the beta maritima, the
carduus acoulis, rare in Cornwall, and some others.

Doctor Borlase records some instances of great longevity in this
parish, but such generally occur in all dry and unconfined districts,
more especially when they are somewhat elevated above the ordinary
level of alluvial countries.

       *     *     *     *     *

A manufactory has been recently established for producing ornamented
trifles from the beautifully coloured and variegated serpentine of
this district, and with so much success that vases have been turned in
lathes, exceeding a foot in height, and they hope to polish
chimney-pieces on a large scale.




LANDRAKE.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this perish is lost.


TONKIN.

Landrake is situate in the hundred of East, and hath to the west St.
Germans; to the north Quethiock; to the east Pillaton, Botus Fleming
and St. Stephan’s; to the south St. Erney.

This church, in A. D. 1291, the 20th Edward I., is valued at £4.
13_s._ 4_d._ being then appropriated to the Priory of St. Germans; the
vicarage at £10.

The vicarage is valued by Wolsey at £18. 12_s._ 4_d._ The patronage in
Lord Hobart, as heir to Sir John Maynard.

The manor of Lanrake, as the parish should also be written, is
reckoned to be the very best in the county. It was valued in the 1st
year of Edward I. at £100, which no other estate came up to but
Sheviock and Pawton, which last however was valued at £120.


THE EDITOR.

There seems to be but little of importance connected with this parish.
The extensive manor of Lanrake is said by Mr. Lysons to have belonged
at an early period to the family of St. Margaret, and in the
seventeenth century to have belonged to Sergeant Maynard, from whom it
passed by marriage to the family of Hobart, and from that to
Edgecumbe. This manor includes the advowson of the vicarage; and the
impropriation of the great tithes belonged also to Sergeant Maynard,
having been a part of the endowments taken from the Priory of St.
Germans.

The church town is rather a large village, and the church and tower
are of the form and size common throughout Cornwall. The church
contains several monuments.

In this parish is another village, called Wotton Cross, and part of a
third called Tidiford, where a small river, navigable for barges, and
communicating with the Tamar at Hamoaze, divides Landrake from St.
Germans.

The facility of water communication has established some trade at
Tidiford, but it is chiefly remarkable by the great quantities of
Plymouth limestone burnt there for manure.

The system of using lime in agriculture does not date further back in
this district than the early part, or perhaps than the middle, of the
last century; and it is supposed at the least to have doubled the
value of all the land, and in consequence to have increased the
population, improved the country, and largely added to all the sources
of honest industry and employment.

Wotton, as a seat of the Courtenays, must have been in former times a
place of some consequence. It belonged to the family of Blake, the
heiress of which family has married Francis Dogherty, Esq.




ST. ERNEY.


The little parish of St. Erney, being in fact a part of Landrake,
except that its church still exists as a chapel supported by a local
rate, is not noticed by Mr. Hals under the letter E, and his account
of it is therefore lost, with this part of his manuscript.


TONKIN.

St. Erney, St. Erna, or St. Erne, stands in the hundred of East, and
hath upon the north Landrake, upon the south St. Germans Creek, upon
the west St. Germans, upon the east Botus-Fleming.

San Erna in the Cernawish tongue signifies holy hour, with reference
to, I apprehend, the time set apart for the celebration of divine
service. In the Saxon and Kernawish combined, San Erna is an holy or
sacred eagle; and if so, I take it, the name must be construed as
relating to the person that officiates at divine service, who, as an
eagle, ascends up to heaven for metaphysical or supernatural
mysteries――as St. John the Evangelist, whose similitude is an eagle.
In this sense we have Eagle vicarage in Graffo hundred, Lincolnshire.

This is a daughter church to Landrake.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons notices the manor of Trelugan, of which Wotton in Landrake
seems to be the barton; and also the manor of Markwell, which he says
belonged to Thomas Earl of Lancaster, attainted in the reign of Edward
II. Then to the Bodrugans, and after the attaint of Henry de Bodrugan,
in the reign of Henry VII. it was granted to Sir John Paulet, and
descended to the late Duke of Bolton.

Mr. Lysons states, that this being a daughter church to Landrake, is
entitled to service but once a month; it is probably entitled once in
three weeks, which is the general custom or canon.

  Landrake measures    2217 } statute acres.
  St. Erney             881 }
                       ----
                       3098
  Annual value of the Real Property in both         £.   _s._ _d._
    parishes, as returned to Parliament in 1815   5818   0    0
  Poor Rate in both parishes 1831                  459   2    0
  Population of  } in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
  both parishes. }    613   |    768   |    841   |    872
    giving an increase of 42 per cent. in 30 years.
  Rector of Landrake, the Rev. Wymond Cory, presented in 1802 by
    the Countess of Mount Edgecombe; of St. Erney, the Rev. H.
    Molesworth, presented in 1823 by Lord de Dunstanville.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

St. Erney consists principally of a blue slate or calcareous schist,
and it probably also contains limestone, as is the case in St.
Germans, the two parishes being separated only by a small creek.

Landrake. This parish is entirely constituted of rocks belonging to
the calcareous series, like those of the adjacent parishes, St. Erney
and St. Germans.




LANDULPH, OR LANDILIP.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Landulph is in the hundred of East. To the west of it is Pillaton and
Botus-Fleming, to the north St. Dominick, to the east and south the
river Tamar.

This signifies the church of Dilp.

It is a rectory, valued in the King’s Books at £20. 3_s._ 6_d._ The
Duke of Cornwall patron.

This church was valued in the time of Pope Nicholas at £4, having
never been appropriated, the prior of St. Germans receiving out of the
rectory a pension of £8; and if I understand the entries rightly, the
same did the abbat of Tavistock.


THE EDITOR.

The church of Landulph is situated almost on the margin of the shore,
and looks directly down the river. It contains monuments of the
Lowers, but it has one monument of extraordinary interest, to the
memory of Theodore Paleologus, descended from the last Emperors of
Greece, or as they styled themselves in the single city of
Constantinople, Emperors of Rome.

A very ample account of all that can be collected with respect to this
personage, has been given by the present learned and ingenious rector
Mr. Francis Vyvyan Jago Arundell, in a communication to the Society of
Antiquaries, in 1815.

     “In the parish church of Landulph, in the eastern extremity of
     Cornwall, is a small brass tablet fixed against the wall, with
     the following inscription:――

     ‘Here lyeth the body of Theodore Paleologus, of Pesaro in Italye,
     descended from yᵉ Imperyal lyne of yᵉ last Christian emperors of
     Greece, being the sonne of Camilio, yᵉ sonne of Prosper, the
     sonne of Theodoro, the sonne of John, yᵉ sonne of Thomas, second
     brother of Constantine Paleologus, the 8ᵗʰ of that name, and last
     of yᵗ lyne yᵗ rayned in Constantinople until subdued by the
     Turks, who married wᵗ Mary, yᵉ daughter of William Balls, of
     Hadlye in Souffolke, Gent. and had issue 5 children, Theodore,
     John, Ferdinando, Maria, and Dorothy; and departed this life at
     Clyfton, yᵉ 21ˢᵗ of Janʸ, 1636.’

     “Above the inscription are the imperial arms proper, of the
     empire of Greece――an eagle displayed with two heads, the two legs
     resting upon two gates; the imperial crown over the whole, and
     between the gates a crescent for difference as second son.

     “The Paleologus dynasty were descended from the imperial race of
     the Comneni; and the first of the family was Michael Paleologus
     about 1270; to whom succeeded Andronicus the First and Second,
     John I., and Emmanuel, who died 1425, leaving six sons. The
     eldest, John II., who was associated with his father in the
     government during his lifetime, succeeded him. Andronicus, the
     second son, had the principality of Thessalonica, and died of a
     leprosy soon after the sale of that city to the Venetians. Some
     fortunate incidents had restored Peloponnesus, or the Morea, to
     the empire; and in his more prosperous days Emmanuel had
     fortified the narrow isthmus of six miles with a stone wall and
     153 towers. The wall was overthrown upon the first blast of the
     Ottomans; the fertile peninsula might have been sufficient for
     the four younger brothers, Theodore and Constantine, Demetrius
     and Thomas, but they wasted in domestic contests the remains of
     their strength, and the least successful of the rivals were
     reduced to a life of dependance in the Byzantine palace. On the
     death of John II., who survived four years the Hungarian crusade,
     the royal family by the death of Andronicus, and the monastic
     profession of Isidore (or Theodore), was reduced to three
     princes, Constantine, Demetrius, and Thomas. Of these, the first
     and last were far distant in the Morea; but Demetrius, who
     possessed the domain of Selybria, was in the suburbs at the head
     of a party. His ambition was not chilled with the public
     distress, and his conspiracy with the Turks and the schismatics
     had already disturbed the peace of the country. He would have
     supplanted his brother, and ascended the throne, but for his
     mother and the great men, who prevented him. His younger brother,
     the despot Thomas, also accidentally returning to the capital,
     asserted the cause of Constantine, who was crowned emperor.

     “Demetrius and Thomas now divided the Morea between them; but,
     though they had taken a solemn oath never to violate the
     agreement, differences soon arose, and Thomas took up arms to
     drive Demetrius out of his possessions; Demetrius hereupon
     retired to Asan, his wife’s brother, by whose means he obtained
     succours from Amurat, and compelled Thomas to submit the matters
     in dispute to the emperor’s (Constantine’s) arbitration. But that
     prince refusing to deliver to his brother the territories that
     fell to his share, Mohammed ordered Thuraken, his governor in the
     Morea, to assist Demetrius, and demolish the wall that shut up
     that country. Hereupon Thomas gave him the city of Kalamata, in
     lieu of the territory of the Skortians, which he detained.
     Immediately on this event, Mohammed besieged and took
     Constantinople, in defence of which Constantine was slain.

     “The dissensions of the two brothers may be considered a
     principal cause of the fall of the Greek empire.

     “After the capture of Constantinople, Mohammed makes war on
     Demetrius and Thomas, under pretence of recovering the tribute
     due to him from them as despots of the Morea; but he is obliged
     to retire, and soon after comes to agreement with them. At this
     time the Albanians, Thomas’s subjects, revolt, and attack
     Pattras, a city of Achaia, where Thomas resided, but are
     repulsed; they would have been, however, ultimately successful,
     had not Mohammed sent his general Thuraken to their assistance.

     “The two brothers again falling out, and endeavouring to supplant
     each other, Mohammed takes advantage of it, and in 1458 sends an
     order to the despots of the Morea to pay three years’ arrears of
     ten thousand ducats tribute, or quit the country. In spring
     following, he marched to attack the Morea, and reduced Corinth,
     without using force. At the first news of his appearance, Thomas,
     one of the despots, retired to Italy with his wife and children;
     and Demetrius, the other, submitted of his own accord to the
     Soltân, who carried him away to Constantinople.

     “Such is the account given in the Universal History from Dukas.
     The relation of Khalcondylas in the same work is more particular,
     as well as more favourable to the character of Thomas: ‘Prince
     Thomas having retired from Pylos, repaired to the island of
     Korfu, where he left his family, and set sail for Italy; at the
     same time he sent an ambassador to know if Mohammed would give
     him a great extent of country along the sea coast in exchange for
     the city of Epidamnum. The Soltân, by way of answer, put the
     envoy in irons, but soon after sent him back. Thomas arriving at
     Rome 1461, was lodged in the Pope’s palace, and had a pension of
     three thousand livres for his other expenses.’

     “Rycaut, in his History, gives a still higher character of
     Thomas: ‘Thomas getting into the castle of Salmenica, defended
     the same against the infidels a whole year, when, despairing of
     relief, he escaped into Italy, where the Pope allowed him a
     pension till the day of his death.’ Of him Mahomet gave this
     character: ‘That he had found many slaves, but never a man in the
     Grecian province besides Prince Thomas.’

     “But Gibbon has a very contemptible account of the ultimate fate
     of this unfortunate family. He says, that Demetrius died at
     Constantinople in a monastic habit, and abject slavery; that the
     misery of Thomas was prolonged by a pension of six thousand
     ducats from the Pope and cardinals; that he died leaving two
     sons, Andrew and Manuel, who were educated in Italy; that Manuel
     the younger returned to Constantinople, where he was maintained
     by the Soltân, and died, leaving a son, who was lost in the habit
     and religion of a Turkish slave. The elder brother, Andrew,
     contemptible to his enemies, and burthensome to his friends, was
     degraded by the baseness of his life and marriage, and sold his
     title to the empires of Constantinople and Trebizond to Charles
     VIII. in 1494, who assumed the purple and title of Augustus. And
     in a note he says, from Du Cange, that the Palæologi of
     Montferrat were not extinct till the next century, but they had
     forgotten their Greek origin and kindred.

     “So degrading is the account this historian gives us of the
     remains of this celebrated family. It is a grateful task to
     endeavour to prove his representation in some respects incorrect
     and undeserved; as we shall then be authorised to hesitate upon
     what he tells us as to the rest, and to put a more liberal
     construction upon the whole.

     “From the inscription at Landulph it is clear Thomas had _three
     sons_: the third, called _John_, whose family, though we have no
     particular mention of them, remained in Italy, at Rome probably,
     and Pesaro, till the time of Theodore. From the inscription it is
     also certain that this family was not extinct in 1636, and
     perhaps some of the descendants are still living in England at
     this moment.

     “The imputation thrown on the _Montferrat_ Paleologi certainly
     does not apply to this branch, that they had forgotten their
     Greek origin and kindred; on the contrary, the inscription
     proves, from the accuracy of the pedigrees and the arms with the
     difference of second brother, that the family of Theodore
     Paleologus, had neither forgotten their Greek origin nor high
     descent, but still gloried in them, and were scrupulously exact
     in perpetuating the same.

     “The names of Theodore and John occurring in this pedigree, and
     continued in the family of Theodore, are still stronger
     evidences. Camillo, Prosper, and Ferdinando, were probably
     acquired on their connection with Italian families.

     “It would be absurd to make any conjectures as to the history of
     Theodore’s predecessors, as we have no documents to warrant any
     conjecture. If we hazard any opinion at all, we may suppose, that
     when, in 1464, the Venetians under Vetorio Capelli warred against
     the Turks and attacked _Pattras_, Thomas’s former residence, he
     probably joined them, perhaps fell there; and in the frequent
     wars which afterwards occurred between those powers, John,
     Theodore, Prosper, and Camillo, were probably not idle
     spectators, but joined against the common enemy, as well from a
     recollection of former wrongs, as a hope to regain some part of
     their ancient possessions. Indeed, their settlement at Pesaro
     might have been whilst the duchy of Urbino belonged to the
     Venetians, and in consideration of the part they took in those
     wars.

     “Theodore Paleologus was born, we may infer from the inscription,
     at _Pesaro_. Of his mother we know nothing; his father was called
     _Camillo_. The time of his birth is also uncertain; though, from
     his marriage in 1615, _then a widower_, we may suppose him to be
     then about forty, which carries back his birth to 1575.

     “Theodore’s removal from Italy, and settlement in England, must
     have been either compulsive or voluntary. If the former, it was
     probably either on account,

     “1. Of his religion; or,

     “2. From other causes.

     “As to the first, the Paleologus family, from the time of John
     II., were reconciled to and in union with the Latin church; and
     to this circumstance is probably to be attributed the protection
     afterwards afforded to Thomas by the Pope, perhaps through the
     interest of Cardinal Isidore, the resident nuncio at
     Constantinople. But the Greek church still differed very
     materially in many points from the Latin; and though Gregory
     XIII. founded a college at Rome for the education of the Greek
     children in the sciences and religion, (and here perhaps Theodore
     was educated), yet we find him opposing what he called the errors
     of the Greeks; and in particular, on his alteration of the
     calendar he is much incensed against them for refusing to receive
     it. And again, in the pontificate of Clement VIII. we find him
     particularly anxious to reform the Greek church, and much enraged
     at being imposed on by a pretended embassy from the metropolitan
     of Russia, which proved to be a forgery. If Theodore, as is most
     probable, was still of the Greek Church, these circumstances
     might have induced the Pope to withdraw the protection and
     support hitherto afforded to the family.――But if,

     “2. To other causes, is to be attributed Theodore’s departure
     from Italy, it was perhaps from the rigid decree of _Sixtus_ the
     Fifth, (about the year 1585), prohibiting foreigners from living
     at Rome, unless they brought a certificate that they were able by
     some trade or profession to maintain their families. If
     Theodore’s family were then at Rome, and in dependance on the
     papacy, perhaps Sixtus might enforce this decree to rid himself
     of a family whose high descent he possibly regarded with a
     jealous eye, recollecting the meanness of his own origin. Or, the
     severe famine, which in 1590 afflicted all the ecclesiastical
     state, might oblige Theodore, among others, to emigrate to
     another country.

     “If, on the other hand, Theodore’s departure from Italy was
     voluntary, as is most probable, it might be from having formed
     some acquaintance, either with natives of this country, or with
     foreigners who were coming hither.

     “About the same time that the Greek college was founded at Rome,
     (and where we may imagine Theodore to have had his education),
     another was founded called the Scotch college, for children of
     refugees from Scotland and England. Here we may suppose Theodore
     to have had some acquaintance; nor is it unlikely that when the
     jubilee in 1601 attracted a vast assemblage of persons from all
     countries to Rome, some one of these might have prevailed on
     Theodore to return to England with them. In the same year 1601,
     the Duke of Braciano, a neighbouring state to Pesaro, came to
     England, or rather Scotland, on a visit to the King of the Scots
     his relation. Did Theodore accompany him? Again, we may suppose
     him to have volunteered in the war against the Turks under
     Rodolph II. in whose army were many Englishmen, and in particular
     Sir Thomas Arundel, whose namesake, and probably friend, Thomas
     Arundel, resided at Clifton, the subsequent residence of
     Theodore. Did he come over with him? If not, we may lastly
     imagine he came here through Sir Henry Killigrew, ambassador
     about this time to the Venetians or Genoese. The connection
     between the Arundel, Killigrew, and Lower families, give the most
     plausibility to the two last conjectures.

     “But whatever may be our conjectures as to Theodore’s removal
     from Italy, we know that in 1615 he was actually in England, at
     Hadley in Suffolk, and (then a widower) married Mary, daughter of
     William Balls, of that town. No traces of the Balls family remain
     at present, either from tradition or otherwise, except the
     register of Theodore’s marriage; and even here, Mr. Wilkins, the
     minister, who has favoured me with a copy of this register, says
     that it is too mutilated and imperfect to decipher accurately the
     name of Paleologus.

     “The issue of this marriage, as the monument tells us, were five
     children, Theodoro, John, Ferdinando, Maria, and Dorothy, all of
     whom must have been born before Theodore left the eastern part of
     the kingdom; for the register of Landulph, perfect till the year
     1629, makes no mention whatever of the name. He could not
     therefore have settled at Clifton in Landulph earlier than 1622
     or 1623.

     “Clifton, a few years before this, in 1600, was the mansion of
     the Arundels; but in 1630, Sir Nicholas Lower, a Cornish
     gentleman, who married Sir Henry Killigrew’s daughter, was living
     at Clifton. Between these two dates Paleologus must have come
     here; and what is more particular, he died at Clifton in 1636, at
     the very time that Clifton was the residence of Sir Nicholas
     Lower.

     “I have made repeated inquiries of the old people of the parish,
     but not the slightest tradition remains respecting him; and here
     again conjecture must supply the place of fact. When Theodore
     came to Clifton, he came with his family, for by the register it
     appears one of his daughters married in the parish, and the other
     died here unmarried. There must then have been some connection
     either between the Arundel or Lower families and himself.

     “As to the first supposition, if it is probable he came into
     England with Sir Thomas Arundel from the battles in Hungary, we
     may suppose Sir Thomas recommended him to Landulph, as from its
     vicinity to the sea and warmth of climate, more nearly resembling
     the climate and situation of Pesaro than any other place in the
     kingdom. In this case we may suppose him to have taken Clifton
     for a term, and as the house appears to have been originally
     divided into two, the subsequent occupier, Sir Nicholas Lower and
     Paleologus, might be both living at Clifton at the same time,
     unconnected with each other.

     “The more probable supposition, however, is, that he settled at
     Clifton from the connection that subsisted between Sir Henry
     Killigrew (who, I feel strongly inclined to believe, brought him
     to England) and Sir Nicholas Lower. Sir Nicholas Lower married
     Sir Henry’s daughter, and as they were now advanced in life,
     without any family, the society of Paleologus and his children
     might be desirable to them; particularly when we recollect that
     this was the time when the Greek language was so much in fashion
     in England, that even ladies studied it most zealously; that Lady
     Killigrew was one of the learned daughters of Sir Anthony Cooke,
     celebrated for her literary attainments, and particularly her
     knowledge of Greek; and it is reasonable to suppose her daughter,
     Lady Lower, wife of Sir Nicholas, was brought up with the same
     fondness for the classic languages; and where could she expect to
     find so able an instructor as a descendant of the first family in
     the Greek empire; or what place could be more suited to classical
     pursuits than the retirement of a country mansion, such as
     Clifton.

     “On the 21st of January 1636, as appears by the monument,
     Theodore Paleologus died at Clifton, Sir Nicholas and Lady Lower
     being still alive; of whom the latter died in 1638, and Sir
     Nicholas in 1655.

     “The Landulph register, perfect from 1540 to 1628, has then a
     great chasm till the year 1649; and during this interval all the
     entries that would have been probably most interesting to our
     inquiries were made.

     “Some little time since I examined the duplicates of parish
     registers, deposited in the room of archives in Exeter cathedral;
     and after a laborious search among the registers of two
     centuries, thrown promiscuously together without arrangement as
     to either parishes or dates, and those for the most part
     obliterated by the damp, I had the good fortune to recover the
     Landulph register for the year 1636, which had the following
     entry:

     “‘Theodore Palleologus was buryed the 20th daye of October.’

     “By the monument Theodore is said to have died the 21st of
     January 1636; from the register it appears he was buried October
     20, 1636. It can hardly be supposed the body was kept from
     January till October, and the difficulty is increased from the
     knowledge, that by the mode of calculation in use at that time,
     the year commenced at Lady-day; so that, if he died January 21,
     1636, the 20th of October following must have been in 1637.

     “The body, if it remained any considerable time uninterred, would
     have been inclosed in a lead coffin; but this was not the case,
     for about twenty years ago, when the vault was accidentally
     opened, the coffin of Paleologus was seen, a single oak coffin;
     and curiosity prompting to lift the lid, the body of Paleologus
     was discovered, and in so perfect a state as to ascertain him to
     have been in stature much above the common height, his
     countenance of an oval form, much lengthened, and strongly marked
     by an aqueline nose, and a very white beard reaching low on the
     breast.

     “Of the five children left by him, no traces remain of two sons,
     John and Ferdinando. Whether they joined the brothers of Sir
     Nicholas Lower, who were distinguished cavaliers on the king’s
     side in the unhappy wars that distracted the country soon after
     the death of Theodore, and in which Major Lower gallantly fell;
     or whether the miserable state of England induced them again to
     re-visit Italy, cannot be ascertained.

     “Theodore was a sailor, and served on board the Charles II.
     Captain Gibson. He died at sea 1693, as appears by a will and
     power in the Commons, obligingly communicated to me by Francis
     Townsend, Esq. Windsor Herald. This is dated August 1, 1693, and
     solely in favour of his wife Martha. If he had any children they
     are not named in it. The signature is Theodore Paleologey; and
     though described simply as mariner, it should seem he was
     possessed of landed estate, as there are four witnesses, Charles
     Gibson, commander, J. Wright, John Corneth, Richard Roberts.

     “Mary Paleologus died at Landulph unmarried in 1674; and her
     sister Dorothy was married in 1656 to William Arundel, the
     grandson probably of Alexander Arundel, of Clifton. This marriage
     is registered at Landulph and St. Mellion, as solemnised in both
     parishes; the entry at the latter is, ‘Dorothea Paleologus de
     stirpe Imperatorum.’ Soon after their marriage they settled in
     St. Dominick, an adjoining parish, the registers of which having
     been accidentally destroyed, it is impossible now to determine if
     they had any issue, though it seems highly probable. They were
     both buried at Landulph, Dorothy in 1681, and her husband in
     1684; and as some years after, a Mary Arundel was married to
     Francis Lee, the imperial blood perhaps still flows in the
     bargemen of Cargreen!”

The manor of Landulph is traced back to the family of D’Alneto, from
whom it passed to the Courtenays, and fell to the Crown on the
attainder of Henry Courtenay, Marquis of Exeter, in 1539, soon after
which it was annexed to the duchy of Cornwall.

The manor of Glebridge has passed through various families, and is now
the property of Mr. Bluett.

But the principal place in this parish was Clifton. Sir John Arundell
is said to have built the house about the year 1500. It is believed to
have afterwards belonged to the Killigrews, as it passed in succession
to Sir Nicholas Lower and Sir Reginald Mahon, who married the
daughters of Sir Henry Killigrew. The former died without issue; and
it was ultimately sold with the other property of the Mahons to Pitt.

The Lowers had their principal seat at St. Winnow, and were eminent
during several successions. Some of this family were distinguished by
their proficiency in science, and by their friendships with scientific
men. This has been very recently made prominent in a work that cannot
receive too much commendation, either for the accuracy, the ability,
or for the industry displayed by its author. The Life of Dr. Bradley,
by Stephen Peter Rigaud, M.A. Savilian Professor of Astronomy in
Oxford, and Director of the Radcliffe Observatory, 1 vol. 4to. 1832.

  Landulph measures 1564 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3596    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           363    0    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   529   |    590   |    579   |    570
    giving an increase of not quite 8 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. F. V. Jago, F.S.A. presented
    by the Prince of Wales, as Duke of Cornwall in 1805.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Doctor Boase says of the geology of this parish, that it is situated
like the last on the calcareous series, and that its rocks are similar.




LANEAST.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Laneast is in the hundred of East. To the west of it is St. Clether,
to the north Egloskerry, to the east Trewren, to the south Alternun.

This parish taketh its name from its situation to the east of St.
Clether.

It is an impropriation, belonging formerly to the Priory of
Launceston. The great tithes are at present in the hands of the Earl
of Radnor (Robarts); and the small tithes, out of which seven pounds
a-year are paid for the supply of the cure, are in the possession of
Mr. Arthur Squire and Mr. King.


THE EDITOR.

This parish contains three villages, the Church Town, Badgall, and
Trespearn.

The principal or only seat is Tregeare, belonging to the family of
Baron.

The late Mr. Jaspar Baron either rebuilt or greatly improved the
house. This gentleman was for some time a member of Pembroke College,
Oxford, but did not proceed to a degree. He died in early life,
leaving a son and a daughter. The son became a member of Wadham
College, Oxford. He died unmarried, and still earlier than his father.
The sister, heiress of the very considerable property possessed by
this family, has married a son of the late Mr. Christopher Lethbridge,
of Madford in Launceston.

The great tithes now belong to Mr. George Bennett, and the impropriate
vicarage to Mr. Baron and Mr. Cook.

  This parish measures 2111 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            851    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           148   19    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   179   |    149   |    229   |    279
    giving an increase of 56 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geology of this parish is precisely similar to that of the
adjacent parish of St. Clether.

The northern part is situated on that range of downs which extends
from Launceston to the British Channel. These downs consist
principally of varieties of dunstone, which are sometimes felspathic;
but in general they are very siliceous, and even quartzoze. They are
interesting in an economical point of view, as containing extensive
deposits of the ores of manganese. A mine of this substance has been
long worked at Letcot in Laneast. The ores occur in a lode or cross
course of capel, running north-east and south-west; the lode is about
twelve fathoms in width, and is composed of siliceous materials, or
rather varieties of compact felspar, in which silex greatly
predominates. The ore is arranged throughout the substances of the
lode in veins and branches. In the latter form it was originally
discovered, not many feet below the surface, and in such abundance
that it was obtained at a very trifling cost, for the hardness and
tenacity of the capel permitted the ore to be followed in all its
ramifications without needing support: and the result of these
operations has been to produce a large chasm, with curiously irregular
and indented sides.




LANHIDROCK.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lanhidrock is in the hundred of Pider; hath to the west Lanivet; to
the north Bodmin; to the east Fowey river, between it and St. Winnow;
to the south, Lanlivery.

This parish takes its name from St. Hidrock, and is the church of St.
Hidrock.

This probably may be the manor that in Domesday is called the
Lanredock; and if so, it is one of the manors given by William the
Conqueror to Robert Earl of Morton, with the Earldom of Cornwall.

In the year sixteen hundred and ―――― John Lord Robarts, being
disgusted on some occasion or other with the town of Truro, left his
barony-house there, and new built a large one in this place,
quadrangularwise, to which he added afterwards a noble gate-house, and
enclosed a very handsome park, well-wooded, and watered by the river
Fowey.

This noble lord was afterwards, in 1662, made Lord Privy Seal, in the
place of William Lord Say, deceased. In Sept. 1669 he was made Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, but continued there no longer than the May
following; and about this time he received the honour of being made
Custos Rotulorum of Cornwall. In 1679, July 20, he was created Earl of
Falmouth and Viscount Bodmin, but he kept the title of Falmouth only
six days, when he got it changed to that of Radnor. In October of the
same year he was made Lord President of the Council, in the room of
Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of Shaftesbury. He was twice married, 1st.
to the Lady Lucy Rich, daughter of Robert Rich, Earl of Warwick, by
whom he had issue Robert Lord Viscount Bodmin. He married, secondly, a
daughter of John Smith, Esq. of Kent, a lady of great beauty, who, it
is said, was to have married his eldest son the Lord Bodmin; for which
reason there was never a good understanding between the father and
son. By her he had several children, the eldest of which was Francis
Robarts, a very ingenious man, and a great mathematician, author of
several small works. He was twice married, first to Penelope, daughter
of Sir Courtenay Pole, of Devonshire, by whom he had no issue;
secondly, to the Lady Ann Fitzgerald, daughter of the Earl of Kildare,
and widow of Mr. William Boscawen, of Tregothnan. The said John
Robarts, Earl of Radnor, died at his house in Chelsea, very aged, July
17, 1685, and was brought to Lanhidrock, where he had constructed a
vault for himself and family, and was succeeded by his grandson
Charles Bodville Robarts.

Robert Robarts, Lord Bodmin, his father, was much esteemed by King
Charles the Second, for his bright, lively parts and ready wit. He was
sent Ambassador to the King of Denmark in July 1679-80, but died soon
after his return. Charles Bodville Robarts, second Earl of Radnor,
married Mary, the daughter and heir of Sir John Cutler, by whom he
acquired a great accession of fortune, but no issue. He succeeded the
Earl of Bath as Lord Lieutenant of Cornwall, and he was also Lord
Warden of the Stanneries. He was succeeded by his nephew Mr. Henry
Robarts.

Trefry, that is, the house on the hill, (for bre, bray, vre, fray, are
synonymous terms, indicating a hill or a mountain,) adjoins
Lanhidrock, and was formerly a barton belonging to the Trefrys of
Fowey; although they took not their name from this place, but from
Trefry in Linkinhorne. It now belongs to the Earl of Radnor, who keeps
it as a domain to Lanhidrock. The Earl of Radnor’s arms are, Azure,
three estoiles, and a chief wavy Or; the crest, a lion rampant Or,
holding a flaming sword Proper, the pommel Or; supporters, two goats
Argent, with a ducal coronet round their necks Or; the motto, “QUÆ
SUPRA;” which coat was thus given by John Robarts Earl of Radnor, but
for what reason I cannot tell, since the arms of the family granted to
Sir Richard Robarts, afterwards Baron Truro, by the celebrated William
Camden, Clarencieux King-at-Arms, were, Azure, on a chevron Argent
three mullets Sable, as may be seen in their house at Truro, and also
in the church.


THE EDITOR.

Henry Robarts, the third Earl of Radnor, in possession of the property
when Mr. Tonkin wrote, was succeeded by his cousin John Robarts, son
of Francis Robarts, youngest son of John Robarts, the first Earl of
Radnor; and with him, who died in 1764, the family became extinct in
the male line; and the estate reverted to a sister’s son of Henry
Robarts, who had married Thomas Hunt, Esq. of Mellington in Cheshire.

Mr. George Hunt, the eldest son of this marriage, resided occasionally
at Lanhidrock, and represented Bodmin in several Parliaments. This
gentleman never married, and he was succeeded by his brother’s
daughter, Anna Maria, now (1834) the widow of the Hon. Charles Bagnal
Agar: left with an only son, who has assumed the name of Robarts.

It is obvious that all families, to whatever degrees of elevation they
may afterwards ascend, must at some period or another have emerged
from the ordinary fortunes of mankind. At the time of the Norman
Conquest, hundreds started forth at once by successful warfare and
confiscation; others have risen or fallen by the chances of civil war,
favouritism, marriages, adventures, or speculation in foreign
countries, by professions, or commerce; these last have recently been
more efficacious for ordinary individuals and families than force of
arms.

The family of Robarts, illustrious as it has since been, derives its
origin entirely from trade, and that too conducted in the town of
Truro, now indeed, and for a century past, a place of opulence, and
connected with a productive mining district, where several ample
fortunes have been acquired; but in the reign of the Tudors it could
have been no more than an obscure place in a remote province.

There is nothing known of any particularly fortunate occurrence which
might have heaped wealth on this family; they probably accumulated
patiently through several generations from father to son, when the
rate of interest on all capital gave a facility to the increase of
wealth unknown at the present day. That the family made their progress
in the world after this manner, is evinced by the nature of the
possessions transmitted to their heirs. Extensive on the whole, but
instead of being made up of large masses, like those acquired in
feudal times, it mainly consists of small pieces of land scattered
over the country, on which the successful merchant or dealer lent his
superfluous money on mortgage, and afterwards entered into possession
or foreclosed.

The first Lord Robarts, created a Baron through the influence of
George Villiers Duke of Buckingham, with King James the First,[9] who
emerged from Truro, and built or improved the house at Lanhidrock, and
planted in all probability the magnificent avenues, must have been a
man worthy of his high fortune.

The editor remembers the house, a complete square, with a superb
barbican in front, united to the house, or rather castle, by two lofty
walls.

These walls were first taken down, and then the front, by Mr. George
Hunt, which he replaced by green palisades. This gentleman had the
reputation of being a classical scholar, and he travelled into the
south of Europe, where Taste once fixed her abode, and where she still
lingers or loves often to return; but according to all the opinions
now entertained, he never met her in his walks, nor profited by the
contemplation of her works. Perhaps in his youth the prejudice had not
disappeared which confined all the elegance and beauty of architecture
to upright pillars with horizontal cornices, and esteemed the word
Gothic as of the same import with barbarous, and inviting destruction
wherever it was applied.

This parish was heretofore a complete impropriation to the priory at
Bodmin, in respect to small tithes as well as the great; and being
situated so near the monastery, it was probably served from thence,
and considered as exempt from the canon enjoining the residence of
some spiritual person on all benefices, and it has continued a
donative to the present time. Mr. Tonkin conjectures that the parish
is dedicated to a Saint Hydrock, or Hidrock. No such name is to be
found; but it may belong to the list of missionaries.

The Editor remembers to have heard as facts, from an old lady of
Bodmin, who died many years before the words ‘political economy,’ were
pronounced in England, that the last Lord Radnor kept house at
Lanhidrock in the style of ancient baronial magnificence; that a
bullock was killed every week, and a sheep every day; and that
whatever remained over-night of meat, of broken bread, or of certain
allowed quantities of beer, were on the morning distributed at the
gate; and that in consequence the whole neighbourhood became idle,
depraved, and vicious, to such a degree as to force itself on the
notice of every one, and to produce a full conviction of the utter
destruction that must ensue if it were possible that such mistaken
liberality could be common.

The manor of Lanhidrock belonged in former times to the Glynns, of
Glynn. Mr. Lysons says that it passed from them as a marriage portion
to the family of Lyttleton, and from them by a heiress to Trenance;
and that in the year 1620 Lyttleton Trenance, Esq. sold it to Sir
Richard Roberts, afterwards created Lord Truro. Mr. Tonkin has stated
that this gentleman built the house; but the whole place has the
appearance of much greater antiquity: that he improved and decorated
the building, and perhaps added the barbican and the connecting walls,
is very probable.

  Lanhidrock measures 1659 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1213    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           137    6    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   187   |    235   |    251   |    239
    giving an increase of 28 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The south-western corner of this parish touches on the granite; the
rest is composed of rocks belonging to the porphyritic series, being
principally varieties of compact and schistose felspar rocks,
containing mica or horneblende, or a mineral of an intermediate
nature, not easily discriminated.


     [9] See Nichols’s Progresses, &c. of King James, iii, 230.




LANIVET.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lanivet, in the hundred of Pider, hath to the west Withiel, to the
north and east Bodmin and Lanhydrock, to the south St. Roach,
Luxilian, and Lanlivery.

This parish is a rectory, valued in the King’s books at 24_l._ The
patronage in Kelland Courtenay, Esq. and the heirs of Anthony Nicholl,
Esq. of Penrose, _alternis vicibus_. The incumbent Mr. Vasnoom.

A. D. 1291, 20th Edward the First (the valuation of Pope Nicholas)
this Church is rated at 8_l._ having never been appropriated.

In treating of the estates of this parish, I shall begin with Tremere,
the great town, called in Domesday book Tremer, being one of the
numerous manors in this county given by William the Conqueror to his
half brother, Robert Earl of Morton, with the Earldom of Cornwall. Mr.
Carew calls it Tremore.

It had formerly owners of the same name, who, I suppose, held it in
vassalage under the Earls of Cornwall; they gave for their arms,
Argent, three reap-hooks conjoined in the blades Sable. The last of
whom was John Tremere, Esq. of this place, who left two daughters and
heirs; Alice, married to Geoffrey St. Aubyn, of Clowance, Esq. which
Alice, as appears by the inscription on her husband’s tomb-stone in
Crowan church, died the 1st of May 1400.

And …

This place hath been for several generations the seat of the
Courtenays, whom I take to be a younger branch of those of Trethurfe,
to whom they have at length been heirs; for the present owner’s
grandfather, Humphry Courtenay, Esq. during many years, and up to his
decease, Representative in Parliament for the borough of Michell,
married the daughter of Sir Peter Courtenay, of Trethurfe, and
eventually sole heiress to her brother William Courtenay.

Their son, William Courtenay, married the daughter of ―――― Kelland,
of Peynsford in Devonshire, and their son Kelland Courtenay, Esq. is
the present possessor, 1734; Member of Parliament for Truro; he has
two daughters, both as yet unmarried.


THE EDITOR.

On the decease of Mr. Charles Courtenay, son of the last-mentioned
Kelland Courtenay in 1761, all the property devolved on his two
sisters; one of whom married William Poyntz, Esq. of Berkshire, and
the other Edmund Boyle, Earl of Cork.

Tremere, with much of the other property, has been sold; and Mr.
William Stephen Poyntz has acquired the Boyle share of what remains.

This extensive parish contains several villages. The Church Town,
Bodwanick, Bokiddick, Lamorick, St. Inganger, Trebell, Tregullan,
Tremoore, and Woodly, with a part of St. Lawrence, the locality of an
ancient incorporated lazar-house.

The church and tower may be considered as handsome models of western
ecclesiastic architecture, where all are superior to the average of
other districts. This tower, as well as the adjoining one of Roach,
are without the usual ornament of pinnacles.

In the church are some monuments; one to the memory of Mr. Richard
Courtenay and Thomasin his wife, dated in 1632, is remarkable for its
simplicity and quaintness of its inscription:

  They lived and died both in Tremere,
  God hath their souls, their bones lie here;
  Richard with Thomsen his loved wife,
  Lived sixty-one years――then ended life.

The advowson of this parish was purchased about the middle of the last
century by Mr. Phillipps, a substantial yeoman of Roach; and the
Editor has heard for a thousand pounds. It now belongs to his
great-grandson, the Reverend William Phillipps, who is the Rector.

This parish possesses the curious and interesting remains of a convent
or female monastery, dedicated to St. Bennet.

Very little is known of its history. The remote, and in former times
almost inaccessible, situation of Cornwall, and perhaps the frequent
insurrections during the reign of Henry the Seventh and of Edward the
Sixth, have involved the history of its religious institution in a
greater obscurity than what hangs over any other part of England.

This nunnery is believed to have been a cell to some foreign convent;
and it is not certainly known whether it was entirely suppressed by
Henry the Fifth, or whether, as some have conjectured, it became
attached to the priory of Bodmin, and remained a parcel of that house
till the general dissolution.

It belonged for a considerable period to the Courtenays of Tremere,
and in a state of repair, for there is a tradition of its having made
some defence in the great Civil War, till cannon were used against it.

It was sold in the year 1710; and about ten years afterwards became
the property of Mr. Grose, a farmer of the parish. His son or
grandson, about the year 1775, built a new house on the farm, when
some remains of a beautiful cloister, which the Editor faintly
remembers, afforded a ready supply of materials. It is said, that Mr.
George Hunt, of Lanhidrock, more impressed by the elegance of these
ruins than by the splendour of his own house, interfered to the extent
of remonstrance for their preservation; but when the proprietor
replied that he would willingly spare them, if the difference of
expense for getting stone from a neighbouring quarry were paid him,
nothing further was done.

The mere site of the building has been purchased within twenty years
by the Rev. Francis Vyvyan Jago Arundell, Rector of Landulph; and in
the present year this sequestered spot――scarcely visible in any
direction at the distance of half a mile, inclosed in a deep vale, and
surrounded by trees more lofty than its half-ruined tower; the
appropriate retreat of those who choose their lot――

  The world forgetting, by the world forgot,
  Where round some mould’ring tow’r pale ivy creeps,
  And low-brow’d rocks hang nodding o’er the deeps;

――is by the progress of recent improvement laid open to public view,
and above all to the inspection of strangers. A hill so steep as to be
dangerous for carriages, and extending to a mile in length, has been
avoided, by conducting the London road through this valley, which,
after an interval, perhaps, of a thousand years from the time when it
was devoted to superstitious observances, directly opposed to the
benevolence inseparable from the Author of all Good, and congenial
only to the demon of evil, has at last become subservient to general
utility.

This parish is possessed of certain lands, some within its own limits,
but others at considerable distances in other parishes. These are held
by twelve feoffees, called the twelve men of the parish, a species of
select vestry, which existed in all large parishes in Cornwall down to
the early part of the last century, till it was tacitly done away by
those improvident or insane acts of the legislature, made no doubt in
conformity with the existing prejudices of the times, which have
generated a rapidly increasing tribe of lazzaroni, threatening, if
their progress cannot now be checked, most infallibly to reduce this
once flourishing country, the favoured seat of arts, of science, of
morals, and of legitimate refinement, to a state of vice and of
degradation, worse than that of savages in their primeval condition of
wandering hunters.

The rents are applied to the support of a school, and to some specific
charities, and the surplus given in aid of the poor rate.

Mr. Lysons says, that these lands belonged to Credys in Padstow, a
cell to St. Bennet’s. This does not, however, seem to be very
probable, considering the nature of St. Bennet’s foundation. It is
more likely that the lands were the immediate possession of this
convent; and no such place as Credys is noticed by Tanner.

The history of Lanivet would here close, but the Editor hopes that he
may be allowed to bestow a few lines on the Reverend John Lake, Rector
of this parish more than thirty years; possessed of learning, piety,
and benevolence,

  In wit a man, simplicity a child.

He was educated in Truro, according to a custom evidently derived from
Catholic times, in the acquirement of some classical knowledge, and
then placed in an inferior line of business at Leskeard, where at that
period resided Mr. Heydon as schoolmaster, an ornament to his country
by every species of learning and of acquirement. Here Mr. Lake,
forgetful of his having married early in life, and of a growing
family, devoted his time to assisting Mr. Heydon, and in obtaining
knowledge from his conversation, till on a sudden he found himself
deprived of his wife, left with two daughters, and his business
failed.

Thus circumstanced, Mr. Lake placed the two daughters with his father;
and having collected a hundred and thirty pounds, he proceeded to
Oxford, became a member of Magdalen Hall, and contrived, on this
scanty supply, to keep terms and to obtain orders. He then returned
into Cornwall, served the curacy of Roach, and there married the
daughter or sister of Mr. Phillipps, who had purchased the advowson of
Lanivet; and a vacancy occurring in the course of a few years, he
obtained the rectory.

Here he again became a widower, and married a third time Miss Bridget
Hoblin, of Bodmin, by whom he had two sons. The eldest became a Fellow
of Wadham, and the other of Exeter College. Both his daughters were
dead; and in May 1805, Mr. Lake departed this life, having completed
his 76th year, in peace with all men, having been pious without
fanaticism, and to the utmost of his power, a practiser of the good
doctrines which he taught.

His widow was left with a competence; and his sons were advanced by
their merits and their talents into situations at once honourable and
lucrative; but permanent happiness in this world was not to be their
lot. William went to sea, and was lost with Admiral Reynolds in a
first rate ship of the line; and the second, after struggling with a
consumption, expired in his mother’s arms.

  Lanivet measures 4690 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           4086    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           375   12    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   513   |    687   |    803   |    922
    giving an increase of 80 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The southern part of the parish reposes on granite; and proceeding
northward, the next portion is composed of rocks of the porphyritic
series, which are again succeeded by those of the calcareous series.
The middle portion is by far the most extensive, the other two
occupying only a narrow part, on the extreme southern and northern
parts of the parish. The middle, or porphyritic series, presents the
most interesting phenomena.

Lanivet Hill is covered with large boulders and projecting torrs of
massive rock, which have the appearance of granite; but on examination
it proves to be a felspar rock. The greater part of this hill is
composed of lamellar and slatey varieties of the same kind of rock, as
may be seen in the rubbish of the numerous shafts that occur on the
side of this hill. On the road to Bodmin, near the boundary of the
parish, is a very interesting elvan course. The upper part of it is
completely decomposed, resembling a mass of prepared China clay; the
perfect rock is a greenish yellow compact felspar, with disseminated
grains of quartz; it bears the same relation to the porcelainous
granite of this and of the adjoining parishes, that the hard
porphyritic elvans do to the common Cornish granite, near which they
generally occur.




LANLIVERY.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lanlivery is situate in the hundred of Powder, and hath to the west
Luxilian, to the north Lanivet and Lanhidrock; to the east Lestwithiel
and the river Fowey; between it and St. Winnow, to the south,
Tywardreth and Golant.

The name Lanlivery signifies the church of bucks; for livrou in
Cornish is the plural of levar, or livar, a buck; but for what reason
I cannot so much as guess. This parish is sometimes called Lanvorch,
the church of St. Vorch, to whom it is dedicated.

It is a vicarage, valued in the King’s books at 13_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._ The
patron, Walter Kendall, of Pelyn, Esq.; the incumbent, his father, Mr.
Archdeacon Nicholas Kendall.

In 1291, the 20th of Edw. I. this church was valued at 9_l._ 11_s._
8_d._ for the rectory, and the vicarage at 15_s._ being the
appropriate to the priory of Trewardreath.

Since the writing of the above I have thought upon another etymology,
which I believe to be the true one; that this name is no other than a
softening of Lan-le-Vorch, St. Vorch’s church-place, which is a very
easy and natural alteration.


THE EDITOR.

The church and town of Llanlivery are very conspicuous objects for
miles round, and especially from the Plymouth or great southern road.

The church contains various monuments to the family of Kendall. This
family were originally of Treworgy, in the parish of Dulo, but have
long resided at Pelyn, in this parish. The house is beautifully
situated in a small wooded valley, joining in a transverse course the
river Fowey, about a mile below Lestwithiel. There appears to be a
vague tradition of some religious establishment having existed here,
dedicated to St. Chad, or Ceada, the patron of Lichfield, Worcester,
and Shrewsbury. No trace, however, can be found of any such
establishment; and it is probable that these tales frequently rest on
no more solid foundation that the casual residence of some monk or
anchorite, or perhaps on the dedication of a domestic chapel. There
still exists at Pelin a small summer house, considered as under the
protection of this saint; and an inscription records the festivities
and friendly meetings of four gentlemen annually on the 2d of March,
to commemorate the day, when, according to the legend, this Saint
expired amid a company of angels, singing hymns for the solace of his
dying moments, and for joy of such an accession to the heavenly
mansions.

The inscription is as follows, under a portrait of the Saint:

  Friend, within these walls St. Chad you see,
  A place made sacred to his memory;
  For here four friends did meet upon this day,
  And heads, and hands, and hearts together lay;
  And never dying friendship’s knot to tye,
  And call this place St. Chad’s Society.
                                   March 2, 1694.

The glory of this parish, however, is Restormel Castle, but these
buildings have been so amply described by almost every writer on
Cornish antiquities, that it would be idle to repeat what has been so
often done. It presents one of the finest objects in the whole
country.

Richard, King of the Romans, is believed to have kept court here, and
in his more commodious habitation at Lestwithiel, and he was the last
who exercised even the semblance of independent authority. The earldom
and dukedom of Cornwall have, since his time, done no more than afford
a revenue and bestow a name, like the shadows of a shade, with which
the private gentlemen, holding hereditary seats in Parliament at the
present time, continue to decorate themselves, by assuming the verbal
denominations of offices extinct above three centuries, and which
habit alone enables us to pronounce, as applicable to them, without a
smile; but which offices, like the ancient earldom of Cornwall, while
they had any existence, conferred real feudal sovereignty,
proportionate to their different degrees.

The palace at Lestwithiel has degenerated into a prison for the
stannary courts; and that town no longer witnessing the county
election, nor holding any of its own, may still boast of its being in
some degree at the head of a duchy jurisdiction.

There is a handsome seat almost at the foot of Restormel Hill now
called, Restormel, but formerly Trinity. It seems to have been built
after leases of the park were granted by the Crown. It has passed
through various hands, and finally into those of the Edgecumbe family,
who have been supposed desirous, up to very recent times, of acquiring
all species of property, and, most of all, gentlemen’s residences,
situated near Lestwithiel.

The late Mr. Francis Gregor lived here in 1790, when he was first
elected member for the county, and it is at present held under Lord
Mount Edgecumbe by Mr. Francis Hext, a gentleman of ancient family and
ample fortune, and universally esteemed.

  This parish measures 5,951 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          5,232    0    0
  Poor Rates in 1831                          622   17    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   778   |    965   |   1,318  |   1,687
    giving an increase of 117 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Nicholas Kendall, instituted in
    1815.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

A gently undulating line, drawn north and south through this parish, a
little to the eastward of the church, would divide it into two parts;
of which, the western is the larger, and rests entirely on granite;
the eastern division on schistose rock. Both of which exactly resemble
those of St. Blazey, already described.




LANREATH.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lanreath is situate in the hundred of West, and hath to the west St.
Veep, to the east Duloe, to the south Pelynt. This parish, in the
taxation of Pope Nicholas, is called Lanraithow, by Mr. Carew
Lanrethon, and the same in the King’s book.

Rhaith is in old British a law; Rhaithow the law; so that it
signifieth the church of laws, or of the laws, according to this
etymology, which I will not venture to say is a true one, but it is
the best that I can give at present.

This church is a rectory, valued in the King’s book at 32_l._ The
presentation in John Francis Buller, Esq. by purchase from the late
Charles Grills, Esq. The incumbent, Mr. Richard Grills, only brother
of the late patron.[10]

As I take Court to be the head place of this manor, from whence it is
so called, to have been the chief seat of these Seriseauxes, I shall
here insert what I find of them.

Richard de Seriseaux or Cereseaux, junior, was one of the men-at-arms
who had 40_l._ in rent of lands 17th Edward II. (Carew, p. 139, Lord
Dunstanville’s edition).

Richard de Cereseaux, I suppose father to the former, was one of those
that had 20_l._ per annum of lands or rent, or more, 25 Edward I., and
was summoned to attend the King, and to go into parts beyond sea.

Richard Sargeaux, son, I believe, of the former, was Sheriff of this
county the 12th of Richard II. A.D. 1389. This I take to be the same
person with that Richard de Seriseaux who sold his estate in the 3d of
Henry IV. He held lands also in Kelland and Kilkoid in the hundred of
Trigg. Carew, p. 126.[11]

This Sir Richard Ceriseaux or Sergieaux, for he was knighted, had one
only daughter and heiress, called Alice, who first was married to Sir
Guy St. Alban, Knt. and secondly, to Richard de Vere, Earl of Oxford;
and, thirdly, to Sir Nicholas Throwley, Knt. By the first she had
issue; and the last Earl of Oxford of the Veres, Aubrey de Vere, who
died in 1702, quartered her arms, Argent, a saltire Sable, between
twelve cherries slipped Proper; from whence I guess that Sergiaux was
only by way of abbreviation, their coat alluding to his name, _cerise_
being in French a cherry. This Sir Richard Ceriseaux must have lived
to a great age, since his great-grandson, Geffrey St. Aubin, Esq. was
Sheriff of Cornwall but ten years after him, in 22d Richard II. A.D.
1399, or, I rather suppose, that this Sir Richard Ceriseaux may have
left a son, who was the Sheriff, and that upon his death, without
issue, Alice his sister became the heir.


THE EDITOR.

It appears from Mr. Lysons’s researches, that the manor of Lanreath,
with the barton of Court, passed from the Serjeaux to Pashleys,
Chudleys, and Chamonds, from which last they were carried by heiresses
to Trevanion and Grylls.

William Grylls, of Tavistock, is said in a pedigree of that family to
have married the widow of Knight, and to have settled at Court in
Lanreath; perhaps this lady was the coheiress of Chamond.

Their son, Charles Grylls, bred to the higher department of the law,
married Agnes, daughter of Charles Tubb, Esq. and by this marriage a
very considerable property was acquired in the parish of St. Neot,
where one of the painted windows, the sixth, had been given by the
Tubbs; but where their descendant the Reverend Richard Gerveys Grylls
has, with equal taste and munificence, raised the splendid decorations
of this church to a degree of perfection exceeding that of their
original state, although they are some of the most curious and
beautiful specimens of the arts and of the piety of former times, that
have escaped the fury of passions excited by great changes in religion
and in civil government. See Mr. Hedgeland’s coloured prints of the
sixteen windows, with descriptions of each, and the life of St. Neot,
from Capgrove, 1 vol. 4to.; printed for the Author, No. 6,
Claremont-place, Brunswick-square, and sold by Nichols and Son,
Parliament-street, London, price 2_l._ 2_s._

The church, which is a fine one with a lofty tower, yet almost
obscured by trees, has a monument recording the decease of Charles
Grylls, Esq. on the 2d of March 1612, and of Alice his wife on the
13th of June 1607.

Their son, John Grylls, took a part in the Civil War, as indeed every
Cornish gentleman was obliged to do, on one side or the other; for in
Cornwall, which might well have been conjectured likely to remain
almost free from actual conflicts, two considerable armies were routed
in pitched battles, and two still larger were forced to capitulate.

This gentleman was knighted by King Charles the First on the field of
battle. He married Grace, daughter and coheiress of William Bear, Esq.
A monument in Lanreath church testifies that he was buried there on
the 30th day of September 1649.

Their eldest son, Charles, resided on his estate in this parish, and
married a lady of the family of Mahon.

John, his son and heir, resided also at Court; he married Elizabeth,
daughter and sole heiress of Richard Gerveys, Esq.

Charles, their eldest son, married Mary, daughter of Edmund Spoure,
Esq. of Trebartha, but died without issue. This gentleman sold the
manor of Lanreath, with the barton of Court and the advowson of the
living appended, to Mr. Buller, of Morval. His brother, the Reverend
Richard Grylls, held the living till his decease in 1735; and
succeeded his elder brother as heir of the family property.

His son, Richard Grylls, settled at Helston, where he married
Cordelia, daughter, and eventually heiress, of Thomas Glynn, Esq.
descended from the Glynns, of Glynn.

Their son is the Reverend Richard Gerveys Grylls. It would be
presumptuous in the Editor to attempt any particular praise of this
gentleman, universally esteemed and respected.

The manor of Botelett is stated by Mr. Lysons to have belonged at an
early period to the family of Botreaux, the last of whom, Lord
Botreaux, died in the year 1462, leaving an only daughter, who married
Robert Lord Hungerford.

It has in more recent times belonged to the families of Roberts and
Treville. It became divided by coheiresses of the latter between
Trelawny and Cross; and the latter half has passed to the family of
Lethbridge in Somersetshire. The manor of Treyer is also stated by Mr.
Lysons to have been the joint property of Rashleigh and Glynn; but in
consequence of an exchange to be now Mr. Glynn’s solely; and that
Trewen, a seat of the Dandys, and Trecan, a seat of the Lowers, are
now farm-houses.

  Lanreath measures 4358 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3110    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           485    8    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   478   |    548   |    629   |    651
    giving an increase of 36 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Stephen Puddicombe, presented
    by John Buller, Esq. in 1827.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is entirely situated within the calcareous series; its
rocks are similar to those of Boconnock and Duloe.


     [10] Mr. Grills dying in 1735, has been succeeded by Mr.
     Heal Trelawney, on the presentation of Mr. Butler.

     The parish is printed Laurayton in the Taxatio Ecclesiastica
     Papæ Nicholai; but the u and n may have been easily mistaken
     in the manuscript.

     It is rated in the Taxation 6_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._ Decimæ 12_s._
     8_d._

     [11] Carew says, p. 125 of Lord Dunstanville’s edition,
     Richard de Seriseaux ten 3 parv. feod. de Mort. in
     Lanrethan, Kilgather, et Lansalwys. THE EDITOR.




LANSALLOS.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lansallos is in the hundred of West, and hath to the west Lanteglos
juxta Fowey, to the north and east Pelynt and Tallant, to the south
the English Channel.

This church is a rectory, valued in the King’s book at 18_l._ The
patronage in Thomas Long, Esq. as heir to the Speccots. The incumbent
Cummin.[12] The church was valued for Pope Nicholas in 1291 at 5_l._
6_s._ 8_d._ and the tenths 10_s._ 8_d._ under the name of Lansalewys,
having never been appropriated.

Richard de Seriseaux held (3 Henry IV.) three small fees de Mort. in
Lanrethon, Kilgather, et Lansalwys. (See Carew, p. 125, Lord de
Dunstanville’s edition, quoted in Lanreath). But however this may be,
it is quite certain that the family of Boligh had been possessed of
property here long before that time, for here lived John Boligh, who
married the daughter of Killigarth. He was succeeded by his eldest son
William Boligh, who by Avice, the daughter of Richard Pentine, had
issue a son, of his own name, which last William, by Isabel, the
daughter of William Bodrigan, afterwards married to Ralph Vivian, had
issue one sole daughter and heir, married to John Kelliow, who brought
with her this manor, which continued the principal seat of this
family, although they have sometimes lived at Lanleke in South
Pederwyn, and sometimes at Rosesilian in St. Blazey. Here they
flourished in good esteem, having married the heiresses of Leveddon,
Trehawke, and Trefusis of Landew, and matched into several
considerable families of this county, until such time as Christopher
Kelliow, of Lanlake, Esq. having first mortgaged it to pay the debts
of the family, at last sold the property outright to John Speccot, of
Penheale, Esq.; and this is gone with the rest, or with the major part
of Col. Speccot’s estate, as he devised it by will, to Thomas Long, of
Penheale, Esq. who is the present lord of this manor.

The arms of Kelliow, Or, a chevron between two cinquefoils and a
mullet pierced Sable.

This manor is one of those given by William the Conqueror to the Earl
of Morton.


THE EDITOR.

This church is situated on very high ground; and one of the stations
for the great trigonometrical survey was chosen immediately by it.
When the latitude and longitude were determined, latitude, 50° 20′
25.7″; longitude, 4° 32′ 45.7″; in time, 18m. 11s. west of Greenwich.
Besides the church town, this parish contains three villages,
Tregavethick, Tregou, and Trenewan.

The manor of Lansallas has been traced by Mr. Tonkin to Mr. Thomas
Long, of Penheale.

Mr. Long left three daughters, as has been noticed under Egloskerry.
One of these ladies married Mr. Charles Phillipps, of Camelford,
Lieutenant-Colonel of the Cornwall Militia, and Member for Camelford.
Neither of the sisters had any family; and on a division of the
property, this manor came to Mr. Phillipps, who left it jointly to his
two brothers, Jonathan Phillipps, a Captain in the Militia, and the
Reverend William Phillipps, Rector of Lanteglos by Camelford. The
former gave his share of this manor to his sister’s daughter, married
to her relation Mr. Winsloe, directing them to take the name of
Phillipps; the latter gave his portion to his sister’s son, Mr. John
Phillipps Carpenter, of Mount Tavy, from whom the shares have
respectively descended to Thomas Phillipps, Esq. of Landue, and to
John Carpenter, Esq. of Mount Tavy.

Mr. Lysons mentions the manor of Raphel, formerly Rathwell, which
belonged to the family of Hywis, and was sold to Speccot; and has
followed the great manor of Lansallas, to which the rectory is
appended.

The manor of Tregavithick belonged to the family of Avery, but has
been purchased by the Rev. Joshua Howell.

The manor of Polvethan belongs to Mr. Rashleigh, of Menabilly.

The most remarkable place, situated partly in this parish, is
Polperro, a small town lying on a cove, rendered secure for coasting
vessels by a double pier, and affording an admirable staking for the
fisheries. It was also distinguished for a precarious trade,
occasionally heaping great wealth on individuals, but in general
taking it away more rapidly than it accumulated.

      Hinc apicem rapax
    Fortuna, cum stridore acuto
    Sustulit, hic posuisse gaudet.

  Quem dies vidit veniens superbum,
  Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem.

This is, however, at an end, or greatly diminished. The situation of
the place is romantic and wild, so that an excursion from Fowey, along
the cliffs to Looe, through Polperro, is one of the most interesting
on the whole coast of Cornwall.

  This parish measures 2774 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3218    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           616   18    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   847   |    804   |    880   |    884
  giving an increase of little more than 4 per cent. in 30
    years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. William Rawlins, jun. instituted
    in 1822; son of the Vicar of Padstow.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish belong to the calcareous series. A little
north-west of the church a copper mine has been worked; among the
rubbish of which a fine blue slate is very abundant, but which appears
to differ from the rocks at the surface, merely by those having
acquired a red colour from further oxidation of the iron. The strata
near the coast dip landward at an angle of about 45°, being broken
here and there by narrow gorges, through which the rivulets flow into
the sea. At Polperro the scenery is very fine; and the narrow entrance
into the harbour, which seems to indicate some great catastrophe, is
an object of much interest to the speculative geologist.


     [12] Died in 1730, or a few years afterwards.




LANTEGLOS, JUXTA CAMELFORD.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lanteglos by Camelford is situate in the hundred of Lesnewith; and
hath to the west St. Teath; to the north Tintagell; to the east
Davidstow; to the south Advent alias St. Anne, and Michaelstow.

This parish is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book, together with
Advent, at 34_l._ 11_s._ 2_d._ The patronage in the Duke of Cornwall.
The incumbent Dr. Lombard.

This parish is wholly within the manor of Helstone in Trigg, so termed
to distinguish it from that in the west called Helstone in Kerrier,
they both having the same lord, that is the Duke of Cornwall. This
parish is now said to be in the hundred of Lesnewith; yet formerly,
when the three northern hundreds of Trigg, Lesnewith, and Stratton
composed but two, Trigg Major and Trigg Minor, it was in the hundred
of Trigg Minor, in which deanery it is still reckoned as to the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

The manor takes its name from its once chief place, though now but a
village, about a mile to the west of Camelford. Here, I suppose, the
Duke had a castle; for there were two parks, which, though now
disparked, do still retain the name. They are adjoining to this
village; the one called the Deer Park, and the other Hellesbury Park,
the walls of which are still standing; and the latter of the two is of
large extent, formerly well wooded, and watered by the river Alan,
being a place exceedingly well fitted for country sports; and no
doubt, when the Earls of Cornwall held their Court at Tintagel Castle,
this place was in much repute, not being five miles distant from it.

These two parks are now held by a lease of three lives from the Duke
of Cornwall, by Mr. Nicholas Dennithorne of St. Agnes.

I next come to the town of Camelford, so called from the ford here
over the Alan; “called also,” saith Mr. Camden, “Comb Alan and Camel
from its winding channel, for Cam with them implies as much.”

At the head of this river Alan is seated Camelford, otherwise written
Galleford,―― a little village, formerly called Kambton, in the opinion
of Leland, who tells us that Arthur, the British Hector, was slain
here. For, as he adds, pieces of armour, rings, and brass furniture
for horses, are sometimes digged up here by the countrymen; and, after
so many ages, the tradition of a bloody victory in this place is still
preserved. There are also extant some verses of a middle age poet,
about “Camels” running with blood after the battle of Arthur against
Mordred.

In the mean time, not to deny the truth of this story concerning
Arthur, I have read in Marianus, mentioned also in the Saxon
Chronicle, of a bloody battle here between the Britons and Saxons in
the year 820, so that the place may seem to be sacred to Mars. And if
it be true that Arthur was killed here, the same shore both gave him
his first breath and deprived him of his last. Harrison also saith,
that to this day men that do eare (till) the ground there, do oft
plough up bones of a large size, and great store of armour; or else it
may be (as I rather conjecture) that the Romans had some field or
castra there about, for not long since (and in the remembrance of men)
a brass pot full of Roman coins was found there, as I have often
heard.

To these Mr. Carew adds (p. 288, Lord de Dunstanville’s edition)
“Camelford, a market and fair, but not fair town, fetcheth his
derivation from the river Camel, which runneth through it, and that
from the Cornish word Cam, in English crooked, as Cam from the often
winding stream. The same is incorporated with a mayoralty, and nameth
burgesses to Parliament; yet steppeth little before the meanest sort
of boroughs for store of inhabitants, or the inhabitants’ store. Upon
the river of Camel, near to Camelford, was that last dismal battle
stricken between the noble King Arthur and his treacherous nephew
Mordred, wherein the one took his death, and the other his
death-wound. For testimony whereof, the old folk thereabouts will shew
you a stone, bearing Arthur’s name, though now depraved to Atry.” Then
follows what is before quoted out of Mr. Camden.

Mr. Willis, in his Notitia Parliamentaria, says, Camelford was created
a borough by Richard Earl of Cornwall, who, when King of the Romans,
by his charter made this place a free borough, and granted the
burgesses a Friday market, and a fair on the eve, day, and morrow of
St. Swithin, all which liberties were confirmed by his brother King
Henry the Third, by his charter, dated at Westminster June the 12th,
1259, and in the 44th year of his reign, as appears from an inspeximus
in Queen Mary’s time, of confirmation of liberties to Camelford, in
whose reign this poor borough was encouraged to send burgesses to
Parliament, which it had begun to do in the preceding reign of Edward
the Sixth. The present charter of incorporation is said to be granted
by King Charles the First; and the manor of the borough to be held by
the corporation of the duchy of Cornwall to which it belongs. It is
governed by a mayor and eight burgesses or aldermen, who with ten
freemen, elect the members of Parliament.

The corporation, which is doubtless ancient, enjoys the tolls of the
markets and fairs, with an estate also of 15_l._ per annum, which
helps to support the dignity of otherwise a very mean magistracy. All
these revenues are reputed worth about 80_l._ per annum. The seal of
arms pretended to by this town, seems to be in imitation of the device
of Oxford, for as the arms of that city are an ox passant over a
river, so this has a camel.[13]

Here is only one street of ordinary building, of not above fifty or
sixty houses, all of which are in the parish of Lanteglos; to the
church of which place, distant about a mile, the inhabitants repair to
hear divine service. There was formerly a chapel, which is reported to
have been converted into a dwelling-house: it is not known to what
saint this chapel was dedicated.

Dodridge’s History of the Duchy of Cornwall tells us, that the chief
rent payable to the said Duchy by this borough, is 4_l._ 5_s._ 4_d._


THE EDITOR.

The manor of Helston in Trigg is of very considerable extent. Mr.
Lysons says, that the ancient site or barton of the manor is supposed
to have been at Michaelstow Beacon, called St. Syth’s, where vestiges
remain of a camp. Besides the town of Camelford, this parish abounds
in villages: Fenterwarson, Fooda, Helston, Trefrew, Treegoodwell,
Tremagenna, Trevia, and Trewalder.

At Fentonwoon in this parish was born Capt. Wallis, celebrated for his
voyage round the world and the discovery of Otaheite.

The right of voting for members of Parliament having been declared by
a Committee of the House of Commons, reported on the 10th of November
1796, “to be in the freemen, being inhabitants and paying scot and
lot; and that the capital burgessess as such, have not the right;” it
became important to acquire as much as possible of the property within
the borough to secure political influence; and after various sales and
transfers, Lord Darlington at last succeeded in acquiring the whole.

The civil corporation hold the manor, mentioned by Mr. Tonkin to have
been given by Charles the First, in the capacity of lord of the manor;
but the freemen are persons presented by the homage in the Lord’s
Court. It is almost needless to add that, when the whole property came
into a single hand, and that residence with the payment of scot and
lot were requisite to complete the power of voting in one presented by
the homage, the Borough became what is well understood by the term
“quite close,” and that it continued so till its extinction in 1832,
since which the property has been sold in parcels.

When Mr. Thomas Pitt, of Boconnock, received in 1784 the grant of an
hereditary seat in Parliament, and it became necessary, according to
the established custom, to create an imaginary office for the purpose
of bestowing on him a new appellation, Camelford was feigned to be a
barony.

Mr. Macpherson, the author, editor, or paraphraser of Ossian,
represented this borough in several Parliaments. This gentleman made a
considerable figure in his day, and excited universal attention,
chiefly from his publishing what are called the Poems of Ossian. He is
now perhaps best remembered by his correspondence with Doctor Johnson,
who argued with the force always exerted by his mighty genius, against
the authenticity of this work; and Mr. Macpherson, probably unable to
meet the reasoning, attempted to establish his case by recurring to a
practice almost as obsolete as the achievements of his supposed
heroes, which was by reviving the ordeal or wager of battle, as the
best mode of ascertaining truth; and with this view, according to the
modern phrase, he wrote a challenge to Doctor Johnson, and obtained
the following answer:

     “Mr. James Macpherson,

     “I have received your foolish and impudent letter. Any violence
     offered me I shall do my best to repel; and what I cannot do for
     myself, the law shall do for me. I hope I never shall be deterred
     from detecting what I think a cheat by the menaces of a ruffian.
     What would you have me retract? I thought your book an imposture,
     and I think so still. For this opinion I have given my reasons to
     the public, which I here dare you to refute. Your rage I defy.
     Your abilities, since your Homer, are not so formidable; and what
     I hear of your morals, inclines me to pay regard, not to what you
     shall say, but to what you shall prove.

     “You may print this if you will.     SAM. JOHNSON.”

The living was held for many years by the Rev. William Phillipps, whom
the Editor recollects residing at Camelford, and universally respected
for his placid manners and benevolent disposition. A handsome monument
has been placed to his memory in the church, by John Phillipps
Carpenter, Esq. of Mount Tavy, his nephew and devisee, which records
his decease on the 20th day of April 1794, aged 70.

Mr. Phillipps’s immediate predecessor was Daniel Lombard, Doctor of
Divinity, son of a Protestant clergyman in France, one of those who
were constrained to abandon their country by the persecution raised in
the name of Lewis the Fourteenth, by a Jesuite Confessor to the King
and his mistress, the widow of a buffoon. He received the early part
of his education at the Merchant-Taylors’ School in London, and
proceeded from thence to St. John’s College, Oxford, where he obtained
a fellowship, and took his degree of Doctor in Divinity. But Lombard
never assimilated himself to the manners nor the society of England.
He spent much time abroad, and especially in Germany, where he became
known either to King George the Second, or, what is more probable, as
a scholar and a divine to Queen Caroline: from them he obtained this
living.

In Germany he most fortunately became acquainted also, with a Cornish
gentleman, then serving with distinction in the army, but
distinguished still more by his abilities, learning, and taste. This
gentleman (Mr. Gregor) frequently received Doctor Lombard at
Trewarthenick, and carried on with him a correspondence on literary
subjects, which is still preserved, and appears to have been his chief
friend and main support in a situation of complete banishment from all
other associates of his studies or of his amusements; for it appears,
from one of his letters, that in former times, he had been admitted a
member of what would now be termed a club, with several branches of
the reigning family at a German court.

All accounts agree in representing Doctor Lombard as a man of profound
ecclesiastical and school learning; but at the same time wholly
unacquainted with the ways of the world in which he was destined to
live, or with the discoveries of modern science. Innumerable anecdotes
were current about him half a century ago; of these two may serve as
specimens.

He proceeded from London to take possession of his parish, mounted on
one horse himself and his servant on another, driving a third laden
with such articles as appeared to be indispensible in a country where
he supposed nothing could be procured; thus attended, he followed the
great road, then passing through Camelford, but inquiring in a foreign
accent for Lan-te-glos juxta Camèl-ford, he proceeded nearly to the
Land’s End without obtaining the least information as to where his
parish lay.

The other evinces that he had not condescended to pay any attention to
the general classifications of Natural History, although Aristotle or
Pliny might have communicated a sufficient store of knowledge in
respect to animals, without his recurring to modern authors. Having
observed a hen surrounded by a large brood of chickens, Doctor Lombard
expressed his utter astonishment and surprise that so small an animal
could possibly afford milk in sufficient quantity for the sustenance
of such a numerous offspring.

He died at Camelford Dec. 14, 1746; and left a valuable library for
the use of his successors.

  This parish measures 3562 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          4,141    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           662   14    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   912   |   1100   |   1256   |   1359
    giving an increase of 49 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Coryndon Luxmoore, presented
    in 1794, by the Prince of Wales.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish no where rests on granite, although it approaches very
near to it. Its southern part is composed of massive schistose rocks
like those of Advent, and is also traversed by beds of elvan, which
very nearly resemble granite. Its northern part consists of rocks of
the calcareous series, among which are slates of an excellent quality
for roofing.


     [13] The device used for arms by the City of Oxford, has
     evidently been derived from a corruption of Ouse Ford into
     Oxford, which has also given rise to the tale of the Empress
     Matilda escaping from thence on an Ox’s back.

     The Saxons or Normans, unacquainted with the Celtic
     language, mistook cam or camel for the name of an animal of
     which they had read in the Gospels.




LANTEGLOS, JUXTA FOWEY.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lanteglos, near Fowey, is situate in the hundred of West; and hath to
the west Fowey Harbour, to the north St. Veep, to the east Plynt and
Lansallas, to the south the English Channel.

It is a vicarage, valued in the King’s books at 14_l._ 7_s._ 6_d._ The
patronage in Mr. Thomas Pitt (late Mohun). The incumbent was the Rev.
Mr. Henry Sutton, lately deceased.

The first place of note in this parish is the manor of Hall. Hall
signifies a moor, as Mr. Carew truly observes; and so by its situation
it seemeth formerly to have been. This place was for many generations
the seat of the Fitz-Williams, a family of special note in this
county. Gervasius filius Willielmi Fitz-William, held five knights’
fees in the reign of Richard the First.

Robertus, filius Willielmi Fitz-William, impotens Miles, Coronator
Domini Regis, (Carew, p. 139, Lord Dunstanville’s edition, Edw. II.
A.D. 1324), an office much regarded in those days.

Sir John, son of William Fitz-William, and Robert, I believe his
brother, were two of those who held 20_l._ per annum of land as rent
or more, 25 Edward I.; and had summons to attend the king in parts
beyond the sea.

Sir John Fitz-William, mentioned above, had only one daughter and
heir, Elizabeth, married to Reginald de Mohun, fourth son to John Lord
Mohun, of Dunster Castle in Somersetshire, whereof some of his
ancestors had been Lords, which John Lord Mohun died in the fourth
year of Edward the Third, leaving his grandson John de Mohun his heir;
so that I take John de Mohun, named among the knights 17 Edward the
Second, to be the same with him married to Elizabeth Fitz-William, and
the dates agree.

They say that this Sir Reginald de Mohun, coming into Fowey harbour
with a company of soldiers bound for Ireland, landing there, let fly a
hawk at some game, which killed it in the garden of Hall, where Sir
John Mohun going for his hawk, and being a very handsome personable
young gentleman (qualities which his descendants retained to the last)
the young lady fell in love with him; and having a great fortune, the
match was soon made up between them by the consent of their friends on
both sides. I shall add no more of this place, than that it continued
to be the chief seat of the Mohuns till the reign of King Charles the
First, when they removed to Boconnock; some time after which, Warwick
Lord Mohun sold the barton only to Mr. Kekewich, whose seat it has
been ever since. Peter Kekewich, Esq. his son, took to wife the
daughter of William Williams, of Bodenick; and dying soon after 1720,
left a son, now residing at Hall. The arms of Kekewich are, Argent,
two lions in bend passant Sable, cotised Gules. The arms of
Fitz-William were, Or, three bends Azure.

The manor of Hall continued in the family of Mohun till the general
sale to Mr. Pitt; and Mr. Thomas Pitt is the present lord of this
manor.

Hall, from its pleasant situation, has been called View Hall; but as
this was an addition of latter years, so is it now lost, and the place
has returned to its ancient plain name. Mr. Carew hath a long
description of the walk here (P. 310), which is still in being, but
much neglected; and also of a remarkable fagot, or rather a piece of
wood, belonging to the Earls of Devon, and carefully kept here; but
this fagot is, I suppose, now lost. There is but little left of the
old house, which I believe was destroyed in the Civil Wars, which may
have inclined the Lord Mohun to part with it.

Under Hall, and adjoining to it, is Bodenick; that is, the house on
the water, suitable to its situation. It is but an indifferent place,
consisting of one long street on a very steep hill, through which is
the highway, and at the bottom of it the passage over the river to
Fowey. There is but one good house in the place, and in that the late
Mr. William Williams lived, and got a good estate by merchandizing.

The manor of Lamellin, that is the Mill Place, from a mill there, lies
on the side of a creek between Bodenick and Polruan. “At the head of
this little Pill,” says Leland, is a chapel of St. Wilow, and by it is
a place called Lamellin, lately belonging to Lamelin, now to Trelawney
by heir general. John Trelawney, of Pool, Esq. married Margery, only
daughter and heir of Thomas Lamellin, Esq. ever since which this manor
hath been in this family, who some time resided here. The present lord
of this manor being Sir John Trelawney, Baronet.

The arms of Lamellin were, Argent, a bull’s head passant Sable, the
horns and hoofs Or.


THE EDITOR.

The church is situated between hills, and therefore but little seen;
it contains monuments to the Mohuns and to others. It was rated in the
valuation of Pope Nicholas at 10_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._

There is a popular tradition, that in the year 1644, just before the
surrender of the infantry commanded by Lord Essex, King Charles the
First was walking on the terrace at Hall, described by Mr. Carew, when
a shot was fired, which missed him, but killed a fisherman almost by
his side. The tradition adds, of course, that the ball was aimed at
the King by some one who knew him, but that must be uncertain.

Polruan, a place in this parish, having some pretensions still to be
called a town, has been wholly omitted by Mr. Tonkin, and probably was
so by Mr. Hals, from whose work the greater part of Mr. Tonkin’s
manuscript is copied. This place is without doubt of great antiquity;
and seems in former times, when vessels required much less depth of
water than they do at present, to have been the principal station in
Fowey harbour. Pol means exactly the same as the English word pool,
and may possibly be the original theme; Ruan has been ascertained in
several instances to signify Roman. Polruan is, therefore, in all
probability, the Roman pool or haven. This place, with a small
district round it, forming in some respects a hamlet within the parish
of Lanteglos, shared in the elective franchise of Fowey, where all
residents paying scot and lot were entitled to vote till the act of
1832 swept it all away.

Tales are related of Polruan having been an independent corporate
town, and of its having sent Members to Parliament, while Fowey was a
mere village; but such traditions are prevalent in all places under
similar circumstances, and they have not here any sanction whatever
from authentic sources.

In the Taxatio Ecclesiastica Papæ Nicholai, the three adjacent
parishes, printed Lansalewys, Lanteglos, and St. Wepy, have this,
App’a. Hosp. de Brugg. want.; and Mr. Lysons states, that this church
was given by Robert de Boyton, in the reign of Edward the First, to
the hospital of _St. James_ at Bridgewater.

The name is inadvertently wrong; for in the Valor Ecclesiasticus, 26
Henry VIII. preserved in the Augmentation Office, is the following
entry in the return from the Hospitale _Sancti Johannis_ de
Brugwalter.

Lanteglos, rector 20_l._

The great tithes and the presentation to the vicarage, came into the
possession of the Mohuns, and were sold with their other property to
Pitt.

There is also extant the appropriation of this church to the hospital
by Peter Quiril, Bishop of Exeter from 1280 to 1292.

“Omnibus, &c. Petrus miseratione divina Exon. Episcopus salutem, &c.
Ecclesiam de Lanteglos, juxta Fawy, cum capella S. Salvatoris, juribus
et pertinentiis omnibus; quæ quidem ecclesia cum prædicta capella de
advocatione Magistri et Fratrum prædicti Hospitalis existit; præfatis
Magistro et Fratribus ac eorum successoribus, ad pauperum et
infirmorum sustentationem, capituli nostri prædicti unanimi accedente
consensu, appropriamus, &c.

“Dat. Exon, in crastino S. Marcæ Evangelistæ, anno gratiæ MCCLXXXIIII
et consecrationis nostræ anno quarto.”

  Lanteglos by Fowey measures 2773 statute acres.

  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           4146    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           548   13    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   678   |    859   |    973   |   1208
    giving an increase of 78 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. W. Hocker, instituted in 1806.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The geology of this parish is the same as that of the southern part of
the parish of Fowey.




LANCELLS, LAUNCELLS, LAWNCELLS.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to this parish is lost.


TONKIN.

Lancells is situate in the hundred of Stratton, having to the west
Stratton, to the north Kilkhampton, to the east the river Tamar,
running between it and Devonshire, to the south Marham church and
Bridgerule. This church is so called from its being a cell to the
abbey of Hartland in Devonshire. The patronage in Paul Orchard, Esq.
by purchase from Francis Basset, Esq.

It is a vicarage valued in the King’s Book at 10_l._ 10_s._ 8_d._

The incumbent, Mr. Thomas, brother-in-law to Mr. Paul Orchard.

In 1291, 20th of Edward I. this church was valued for Pope Nicholas at
7_l._ 15_s._ for the rectory, 15_s._ for the vicarage, and 15_s._
6_d._ for the tenths; it being then appropriated to the abbey of
Hartland, as was

The manor of Lancells. After the dissolution of Hartland abbey, this
estate came to Sir John Chamond, who made it his chief residence. Mr.
Carew says, he was a man learned in the common law, and knighted at
the Sepulchre (that is of our Saviour at Jerusalem). He had a park of
fallow deer at this place, which Norden notices, as I suppose the
abbats of Hartland had before him. It seems to have been to Sir John
Chamond a country seat and a place of retirement. He was Sheriff of
Cornwall in the 20th year of Henry VIII. and again in the 28th year.

His son, Richard Chamond, Esq. was three times Sheriff of Cornwall,
35th of Henry VIII. 2d of Edward VI. and 4th of Elizabeth. He
received, says Mr. Carew, at God’s hands, an extraordinary favour of
long life. He served the office of a justice of the peace almost sixty
years; he knew above fifty several judges of the western circuit. He
was uncle and great-uncle to at least three hundred; wherein yet his
uncle and neighbour, Master Greynville, parson of Kilkhampton, did
exceed him. He married one of the daughters and heirs of Trevenner,
and by her saw five sons and two daughters, the youngest oustepping
forty years.

This Mr. Chamond was knight of the shire 14th Elizabeth, as also
before in the 2d and 3d of Philip and Mary.

He had an elder brother, called Thomas, whose two daughters and heirs
carried part of the lands to Tripcony and Trevanion, with whom they
matched. Master Chamond beareth, Argent, a chevron between three
flowers-de-luce Gules. And so far Mr. Carew; where note that part of
the lands so carried off, contained those in the parish of St. Gorran,
lately in the possession of Charles Trevanion, of Tregarthyn, Esq.


THE EDITOR.

Here was a cell of Austin Canons, dependent on the abbey of Hartland,
distant from it but a few miles, although in the county of Devon.

The following entries are found in the Augmentation Office, in the
roll 32d Henry VIII.:

_Payment from Lancells to the Abbey of Hartland._

                                 £.   _s._ _d._
  Lancells――Redd’ liber’ ten’     5  18    4
                  Custum’ ten’   16   8    5¾
            Perquis’ cur’         0   1    3
                                £22   8    0¾

Nothing seems to be known about the foundation of this small religious
establishment.

Hartland is said to have been founded before the Conquest, for secular
priests, by Githa, the wife of Earl Godwin; but in the time of King
Henry the Second, Geoffrey de Dinam, by the authority of that King,
and of Bartholomew Bishop of Exeter, and by the assistance of Richard
Archdeacon of Poictiers, changed the establishment of Seculars into an
abbey of Austin Canons.

The patronage of this abbey remained in the family of the founder,
Geoffrey de Dinam, till the general dissolution; and the abbats were
accordingly named alternately by Fitzwarren, by Touche, by Carew, and
by Arundell, in consequence of their having married the four daughters
and coheiresses of the founder.

Mr. Lysons gives a very ample detail of the descent of property in
this parish.

The barton of Lancells was leased by King Henry VIII. to John Chamond,
and became the seat of that family. The freehold has been for a
considerable time in the family of Orchard. It is now the seat by
lease of Mr. Joseph Hawkey, in right of his wife, widow of the Rev.
Cadwallader Jones.

The manor of Norton Rolle has the bailiffry of the hundred of Stratton
annexed as an appendage.

This manor has passed from the Rolls to Trefusis.

The manor of Yellow Leigh is the property and the residence of Mrs.
Mary Harris.

The manor of Thorlibear belonged to the Arundells of Trerice, and has
passed by inheritance to Acland.

The manor of Mitchell Morton, extending into several other parishes,
belonged to a family of Smith, and became divided among coheiresses.

Two thirds, having passed through different hands by purchase, became
the property of Wrey J’Ans, Esq. and have descended to his daughters.
The remaining third, with the barton and the advowson of the living,
having been for many years in the family of Orchard, now belong to the
Reverend F. H. Morrison, heir of the late Mr. Paul Orchard.

Tre Yeo, said to have been the ancient seat of the Yeos, is now the
property and residence of Robert Kingdon, Esq.

The church stands in a vale, about a mile and a half from Stratton. It
has a handsome marble altar-piece and several monuments; one of
considerable size, and decorated, to the memory of John Chamond, who
died in 1624.

Scarcely any traces are to be seen of Lancells House, the splendid
residence of the Chamonds.

  This parish measures 5610 statute acres.

Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         3920    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                         637   13    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   647   |    672   |    891   |    848
    giving an increase of 31 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Henry Bourchier Wrey, presented
    by L. W. Buck, Esq. in 1825.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is situated entirely on the dunstone of the northern parts
of Cornwall and Devon; for a more particular account of which,
reference has already been given under the head of Boyton.




LANCESTON, OR LAUNCESTON,


ST. MARY MAGDALEN PARISH.


HALS.

The manuscript relating to Lanceston is lost.


TONKIN.

Lanceston is situated in the hundred of East, and is bounded to the
south by South Pederwyn, as likewise to the west, to the north by St.
Thomas, to the east by St. Stephan’s and Lawhitton.

It is well known that this town and parish took their name from an
ancient priory and church here, now demolished, dedicated to St.
Stephan, being called by the Cornish Lan Stephadon, the church of
Stephan.

The present church is dedicated to St. Mary Magdalen, and is not
valued in the King’s Book.

As for what Mr. Carew says, that the Cornish men called it Lesteeven,
that is no other than an abbreviation of Lan Stephan.

But before I go on with the account of this town and parish, it will
be necessary to observe, that, although Norden (whose authority is
indeed of no great weight, even in the description of those things
which he had seen himself, and gives draughts of, which for the most
part are very erroneous) with many others, call this town, or rather
castle, here Dunhevet; yet it is most certain that the ancient town of
Dunhevet stood at about half a mile distance to the south-south-west
of the present town of Lanceston, in a moorish piece of ground facing
the west, at the bottom of the hill on which Mr. Samuel Line has built
his pleasure house and inclosed a bowling-green, (from whence is a
very pretty prospect of the vale under it to the east, and the course
of the river Tamar) being parcel of the commons belonging to the
freemen of Lanceston. I went on purpose to view the ruins of the said
town this present year 1731, having before this been led aside by the
vulgar opinion, of which every boy I found in the town could satisfy
me to the contrary. On the place where the said ruins appear are three
wells, which I suppose are from the same spring, being pretty close
together; and are, (as I take it) the head of that small river which
runs by Tresmorrow, Lanleke, Landew, &c. below which it hath a
handsome stone bridge, and soon after falls into the Tamar. So that
the said town had, in this respect, the advantage of the new one, as
being well supplied with water, which is much wanting in this last. By
the ruins it doth not appear to have been of very considerable
bigness; though indeed there be no judging well of it, by reason that
all the stones of any value have been from time to time carried off to
build the present town, and the rest employed to make small inclosures
of meadows there.

This place fell to decay, I suppose, on William Earl of Morton
building a castle, or rather repairing the old one and putting it in
the present form, in the beginning of the Norman times; for, by
tradition, this castle has been, from remote antiquity, a seat of the
Princes of Cornwall. This William Earl of Morton being also Earl of
Cornwall by descent from his father Robert, who was half-brother by
his mother to William the Conqueror, drew over the inhabitants of
Dunhevet to this place, by granting great privileges to this his chief
seat in this county.

But before we go on with the history of this town, let us see what
Leland, Camden, and Carew say of it.

Leland.――“After that I had passed over Aterey, I went up by the hill
through the long suburbs until I came to the town wall and gate, and
so passed through the town, ascending the hill until I came to the
very top of it, where be the market-place and the parish church of St.
Stephan, lately re-edified. The large and ancient castle of Launceston
standeth on the knappe of the hill by south, a little from the parish
church. Much of this castle yet standeth; and the moles that the keep
standeth on are large, and of a terrible height; and the arx of it
having three several wards, is the strongest, but not the biggest,
that ever I saw in any ancient work in England. There is a little
pirle of water that serveth the high part of Launceston. The priory of
Launceston standeth in the south-west part of the suburb of the town,
under the root of the hill by a fair wood side; and through this wood
runneth a pirle of water coming out of a hill thereby, and serveth all
the offices of the place. In the church I marked two notable tombs,
one of Prior Horton and another of Prior Stephan; one also told me
that Mabilia, a countess, was buried there in the chapter house; one
William Warwist, Bishop of Excester, erected this priory, and was
afterwards buried at Plympton priory, that he also erected. Warwist,
for the erection of Launceston priory, suppressed the collegiate
church of St. Stephan, having Prebendaries; and gave the best part of
the lands to Launceston priory, and took the residue himself. There
yet standeth a church of St. Stephan, about half a mile from
Launceston, on a hill, where the collegiate church was. Gawen Carew
hath the custody of the priory. There is also a chapel by
west-north-west, a little out of Launceston, dedicated to St.
Catharine; it is now profaned.” So far Leland.

     Mr. Carew is more particular (p. 274 Lord Dunstanville’s
     edition). “Those buildings, commonly known by the name of
     Launston, and written Lanceston, are by the Cornish men
     called Lesteevan (Lez in Cornish signifieth broad, and these
     are scatteringly erected) and were anciently termed
     Lanstaphadon, by interpretation Saint Stephan’s Church: they
     consist of two boroughs, Downevet and Newport; that,
     perhaps, so called, of down-yielding, as having a steep
     hill; this, of its newer erection. With these, join the
     parishes of St. Thomas and St. Stephan. The parish church of
     Launceston itself fetches its title of dedication from Mary
     Magdalen, whose image is curiously hewed in a side wall, and
     the whole church fairly built.

     “The town was first founded, saith Mr. Hooker, by Eadulphus,
     brother to Alpsius Duke of Devon and Cornwall; and by its being
     girded with a wall, argueth in times past to have carried some
     value.

     “A new increase of wealth expresseth itself in the inhabitants’
     late repaired and enlarged buildings. They are governed by a
     mayor and his scarlet-robed brethren; and reap benefit by their
     fairs and markets, and the county assizes. The statute of 32d
     Henry VIII. which took order touching sanctuaries, endowed this
     town with the privilege of one; but I find it not turned to any
     use.

     “To the town there is adjoinant in site, but sequestered in
     jurisdiction, an ancient castle, whose steep rocky-footed keep
     hath its top environed with a treble wall; and in regard thereof,
     men say, was called Castle Terrible. The base court compriseth a
     decayed chapel, a large hall for holding the shire assizes, the
     constable’s dwelling-house, and the common gaol.

     “About sixty years past (i. e. about 1540) there were found
     certain leather coins in the castle wall, whose fair stamp and
     strong substance till then resisted the assault of time as they
     would now of covetousness.

     “A little without the town were founded a friary, and anno 1128
     an abbey, furthered by Reginald Earl of Cornwall.” Thus far Mr.
     Carew.

Having now done with what former writers have said of this place, I
come to give my account of it; and herein I shall begin with


THE CASTLE.

This is seated to the west-south-west of the town, so that you have a
full prospect of it from the western road. Below the wall is a large
and deep graff, which formerly surrounded it, and is still very
visible on the western side; the rest being taken up partly by the
highway, and partly by gardens and buildings, which on the eastern
side come home along to the castle walls. The west gate is in a manner
all in ruins; neither are there any remains of the chapel, the hall,
or the constable’s house, there being now no other building remaining
therein but the house which now serveth for the common gaol; whereas
the old one, as the townsmen say, was over the north-east gate, which
is still kept in good repair, though no one lives in it.

At the north-east end stands the keep, on a high tapered mount, which
I once thought was artificial, though I am now satisfied to the
contrary, there being a quarry of stones almost at the very top of it;
though there has been some art used nevertheless to bring it to the
form that it now has. A covered way formerly led you by steps of stone
of an easy ascent, to the top of it, which steps are now carried off
as well as the roof, and the whole in a ruinous condition; and truly
it moveth compassion to see the woful plight of this so pleasant a
seat, accommodated with a fine park, formerly well wooded, with a
small rivulet of water running through it. The whole being now held
for lease on lives by Hugh Piper, Esq. who by virtue thereof is
likewise constable of the castle and keeper of the gaol, the which was
granted to his grandfather Sir Hugh Piper, Knt. together with the
lieutenant-governorship of Plymouth by King Charles the Second, as a
reward for his sufferings and exemplary bravery in the Civil Wars, in
one of the battles during which the said Sir Hugh Piper was left for
dead in a field for a whole night; being found the next morning, he
was put into a warm bed, and carefully looked to. He lived after this
to a good old age, as may be seen by the inscription on his monument
in the church.

I had forgotten to say anything of Mr. Willis’s account of this
borough, which I shall therefore now insert.

Robert Earl of Morton, and his successors Earls of Cornwall, having
their chief residence at this castle, the town increased much in
buildings and riches, and had certain privileges and liberties
conferred upon it.

There were burgesses inhabiting or belonging to the castle of this
town in the reign of King Henry the Second, and the reign of King
Henry the Third. The town was by its then lord, Richard Earl of
Poictiers and of Cornwall, the King’s brother,[14] made a free
borough, who granted to it by his charter, without date, power to
choose their own bailiffs, who were to answer the farm of the borough,
which was to himself 100_l._; to the prior of St. Stephan 65_s._
10_d._; and to the lepers of St. Leonard, of Lanceston, 100_s._ of his
alms. He granted them also to erect a guild of merchants in the said
borough to hold of him and his heirs, which privileges (as may be seen
by divers charters and letters patent of the Kings of England,
reciting by inspeximus) were frequently confirmed, and with additional
liberties. And in the 10th year of Richard the Second, upon the
petition of these burgesses, complaining that the last assizes and
sessions had been detained from them and held at Lostwithiel, the King
grants that these should be kept no where else in the county of
Cornwall but at Launceston.

This Prince’s father[15] had, on his being created Duke of Cornwall,
inter alia, the castle, borough, and honor of Launceston, assigned to
him and the heirs of his body, eldest sons of the Kings of England, in
whom accordingly this manor has been vested ever since; and is now
held in fee farm by the heir-apparent to the Crown of England, being
by birth Duke of Cornwall.

The corporation consists of a mayor, recorder, and eight aldermen,
who, with the free burgesses, being in number about 130, elect the
members of Parliament. Its present establishment of incorporation is
owing to a charter of Queen Mary, A. D. 1555. At the last Visitation
of the Heralds, held on the 27th of Sept. 1620, the entries were,

Thomas Morton, mayor, Sir Anthony Rous, Knt. recorder; John Genis,
Richard Estcot, Arthur Pinard, Nicholas Baker, Hugh Vigures, Henry
Cary, George Hext, Orwald Cooke, aldermen; and Philip King, town
clerk.

Mr. Willis goes on to say, That this was an ancient market town, may
be seen by the Pipe Rolls in King John’s time, in whose reign the men
of Launceston gave a fine of five marks to change the market from the
Lord’s Day, whereon it was formerly kept, to Thursday, although it
hath since undergone a second alteration, and is now kept on
Saturdays.


THE EDITOR.

No one can approach Launceston, and more especially from the eastward,
without being struck by the magnificent remains of the ancient castle.

Mr. Edward King, in the third volume of his Munimenta Antiqua, treats
much at large of the fortresses erected in remote times throughout
Cornwall; and he particularly dwells on this at Launceston, assigning
to it the most remote antiquity on account of its not bearing any
resemblance to castles built by the Romans, Saxons, Danes, or Normans,
and from its agreement with various of the Phœnician, Syrian, and
Median castles, and especially with those in Asia Minor.

Mr. King says, the keep (unlike all Norman keeps) instead of being of
great diameter and spacious, is very small, although there was
evidently space enough on the top of the rock to have made it as large
as Norman magnificence could demand, had it been erected, as some have
hastily conjectured, by that people. It is only eighteen feet and a
half in diameter within, and it is quite round. On the contrary,
Trematon, in the same county, which may with good reason be concluded
to have been built by Robert Earl of Morton, is a true Norman
structure; and there cannot be a greater contrast than there is
between it and Launceston. Like Tunbridge castle, it is placed, not on
a high natural rock, but on an artificial mound, and is no les than
sixty feet in diameter on the inside. See Dr. Borlase’s Antiquities,
2d ed. p. 354.

The wall of the keep at Launceston is exceedingly strong, being at
least ten feet thick; and within its thickness is a staircase,
ascending up from one side of the passage of the doorway, without any
winding, excepting that of the mere curvature of the wall itself.

The present height is thirty-two feet, the upper part being somewhat
broken down; and it contained, as its only apartments, a sort of
dungeon on the ground, which had no light at all, and two rooms over
it, one above the other. The lowermost of these, or the room
immediately above the dungeon, was nearly as dismal and dark as the
dungeon itself, and appears obviously, therefore, to have been
intended merely to be used as a place for store, or a sort of
treasury; but in the uppermost apartment there appear to have been two
large windows (now broken down) commanding a most extensive view, one
to the east and another to the west; and also a fire-hearth, with a
passage for the smoke carried up through the thickness of the wall
towards the north, all which plainly indicate this room to have been
intended as a sort of state apartment for the actual residence of the
chieftain.

Such is this tower; and its close surrounding works are no less
extraordinary, for we find it encompassed by a second munition still
stronger than itself.

About six feet, or a little more, from its outside, is an encircling
wall twelve feet thick, and nearly equal in height with the floor of
the uppermost apartment of all.

Beyond this second wall is again a second surrounding area in like
manner with the first, only six feet wide, and which was further
inclosed by a third encircling wall, forming a sort of parapet.

Beyond all these was an external wall with a deep ditch.

Mr. King then goes on to compare this castle with ancient descriptions
of those in the east, and satisfies himself of their identity.

Respecting the name, Dun or Doon, is unquestionably a hill, and thence
derivatively a fortress; but no plausible conjecture has been formed
in regard to the second syllable.

A similar observation may be made respecting the name of the town. Lan
occurs as a prefix, in the sense of indicating a church, eleven times
in Cornwall; but it seems difficult to derive “ceston” from Stephan.
Yet if the Celtic pronunciation of Stephan was really Staveton,
Lanstaveton may have easily glided, through Saxon pronunciation and
misapprehension of the terminating syllable into Lanceston.

The priory of Launceston appears to have been a foundation of no small
magnitude. The list of its possessions, in the Augmentation Office,
exhibit a considerable revenue; and Leland describes its church with
handsome monuments: not a trace remains. No one more sincerely
rejoices at the downfall of superstition, originating in ages of
darkness, than the Editor of this work, and above all at the
approaching annihilation throughout Europe of monastic institutions,
promised by the regular and steady current of events; but the sudden
and indiscriminating devastations of the sixteenth century, sweeping
every thing before them like whirlwinds, destroying for the mere sake
of wanton destruction, or at the very best――from a desire of
obliterating all former remembrances; these stamp on the mind very
different impressions; and when it is felt that the storm was urged
forwards by the fury of an individual, by the avarice of those
occupying the highest stations, and by the purposely inflamed passions
of the multitude, it is impossible not to experience the forebodings
of Scipio on the fall of Carthage; and to exclaim with him

  Εσσεται ἡμαρ ὁταν ποτ’ ολωλῃ Ιλιος ἱρη,
  Και Πριαμος, και λαος ευμελιω Πριαμοιο.

The registers and cartularies of this monastery have disappeared; for
these were systematically destroyed. Fragments, however, exist in
ancient transcripts; some, formerly in the possession of William
Griffith, and referred to by Bishop Tanner, are now preserved in the
Lansdowne Collection. Among these the following document may be found
relative to the foundation of the priory by William Warlewast, Bishop
of Exeter, from 1150 to 1159:――Noscat præsentis temporis ætas, quod
Radulfus Ecclesiæ sancti Stephani de Launcestone decanus decanatum
mihi Willielmo Episcopo reddidit. Et ego canonicis regularibus, quos
in eadem constitui, totum dedi. Testes sunt,

  Osbertus, Abbas de Tavistoca.
  Gofridus, Prior Plymptoniæ.
  Will. de Augo, Archidiaconus Cornubiæ.
  Clarenbaldus, Capellanus Regis.
  Magister Odo.

The charter from King Henry the Third, also extant, is a fair specimen
of the times, and contains some local descriptions of property:――

Henricus Rex Angliæ, &c. salutem. Inspeximus cartam Domini Johannis
Regis Patris nostri in hæc verba.

Johannes Dei gratia Rex Angliæ, &c. salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse,
dedisse, et hac presenti charta confirmasse Deo et Ecclesiæ Sancti
Stephani de Lanstaveton et canonicis ibidem Deo servientibus, pro
salute animæ nostræ, et pro anima Henrici Regis Patris nostri, et pro
animabus omnium antecessorum et successorum nostrorum, viginti
solidatas terræ in manerio nostro de Climerston, et preterea viginti
nummatas terræ in eodem manerio. Scilicet, dimidiam acram, quam
Eggerus de Holrode tenet. Hæ autem sunt metæ terrarum illarum.
Scilicet, a termino terræ Radulphi Pitlenam sicut rivus descendit in
magnam aquam de Eny, et usque ad terminum terræ prædicti Eggeri de
Holrode, ex parte orientis et meridiei. Item ex parte occidentis et
septentrionis a Wideslade, sicut rivus currit et descendit in magnam
aquam de Eny in terram de Climerston et terram de Treuris. Et preter
hoc dimidiam acram terræ in Norton quam Warinus tenet. Confirmamus
etiam eisdem canonicis omnia subscripta, sicut eis rationabiliter data
sunt. Scilicet, ex dono Richardi de Raddon unam virgatam terræ, quæ
vocatur Trewenta, quietam et liberam ob omni servitio, præter
quindecim denarios, quos reddere debet ad Tidlaton, de quadam
consuetudine, quæ vocatur Motiled. Et ex dono Roberti filii Alkitilli,
concessu comitis Reginaldi domini sui, terram quæ vocatur Trenchicot.
Et ex dono comitis Reginaldi partem Hamelini presbiteri de Capella de
Castello, cum omnibus libertatibus et rebus parti illi pertinentibus.
Et quadraginta solidos per annum de firma de Castello de Dunheved, et
Ecclesiam Sancti Andreæ de Stratton, cum pertinentiis suis; et unam
carucatam terræ de dominico manerii de Stratton, uxta alteram terram
ejusdem ecclesiæ, cum quadam area Salmarii Elfordiæ, salvo dignitate
capellæ nostræ de Castello de Lanstaveton; et Molendinum quod est sub
Castello de Dunheved, cum eisdem pertinentiis, et consuetudinibus,
quas habebat dum erat in manu Comitis Reginaldi; et terram de
Karnedon, quæ est membrum de Kidlacton. Ita quidem quod de reliqua
parte ipsius manerii de Kidlacton perficiatur eis tantum; quod bene et
plenarie habeant centum solidatas terræ, sicut Comes Baldewinus de
Redevers eis concessit et assignavit, et carta sua confirmavit; et ex
dono Osberti de Bikesleya viginti solidatas terræ in manerio de
Treuris, scilicet villam quæ vocatur Tregof, et terram quæ fuit Luffe,
et terram Warnii juxta pontem; et unam acram in villa quæ vacatur
Carsbroc, cum hominibus et omnibus quæ ad præfatas terras pertinent;
et partem nemoris apud orientem, sicut via dividit usque ad aquam; et
ex dono Bernardi Clerici duas acras terræ, quas tres homines tenent et
reddunt Deo et Ecclesiæ Sancti Stephani, inde quinque solidos
annuatim, quæ sunt subtus viam Trebursi; et ex dono Willielmi de
Henemerdon totam terram de Pech. Hæc quidem omnia cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis concessimus eis et confirmavimus dum essemus Comes
Moreton, sicut ea rationabiliter possident, et sicut cartæ Donatorum
suorum testantur.

Datum per manum H. Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi cancellarii nostri,
vigesimo octavo die Junii, apud Aurivallem anno regni nostri primo
(1199).

Nos igitus has donationes, &c. confirmamus, &c. Insuper concedimus et
confirmamus eisdem canonicis et eorum successoribus, pro nobis et
hæredibus nostris, donationem quam Reginaldus Regis Filius, consul
Cornubiæ, eis fecit in incrementum Ecclesiæ suæ de Lanstaveton, de
Ecclesia de Leskeret, et de Ecclesia de Lankinhorn, in die
translationis Reliquiarum et canonicorum ipsius Ecclesiæ de villa de
Lanstaveton ad vadum, sicut carta ipsius Reginaldi Regis filii, quam
inde habent, rationabiliter testatur.

Hiis testibus,

  H. de Burgo, comite Kantii, Justiciario Angliæ.
  Philippo de Albiniaco.
  Thoma Basset.
  Willielmo Basset.


VALOR ECCLESIASTICUS 26 HEN. VIII.

  _Prioratus de Launceston._

  Unde Willielmus Warwest, quondam Episcopus Exon. est Fundator.

  Summa Valoris tam Spiritualium quam   £.  _s._  _d._
  Temporalium Prioratus prædicti       392   11   2¼
  Reprisa                               38   10   3
                                       ----------------
  Valet clarè ultra repris’ per ann’  £354    0  11¼
                                     ----------------

ABSTRACT FROM THE AUGMENTATION OFFICE.

  _Nuper Prioratus de Launceston._

  _Com. Cornub._                                          £. _s._ _d._
  Launceston.              Scit’ cum Terris d’nicalibus   15  19   6
  Launceston lande cum Burg’ de Newporte
                           Reddit’ assis’                118   5   7
  Launceston lande.        Redd’ Lib’ Ten’                 0   3   5
                           Firm’                          10   0   0
  Bradford.                Redd’ Lib’ Ten’                 0  14   7
                           Co’ven’ Ten’                    6   8   1½
                           Perquis’ Curiæ                  0   3   6
  Canedon Prior’           Redd. Lib’ Ten’                 3   9   7½
                           Co’ven’ Ten’                   12   0   6
                           Perquis’ Curiæ                  1  11  10½
  Clymysland.              Redd’ Lib’ Ten’                 0   8   0
                           Conven’ Ten’                    6  13   9
  Treworthgy.              Red’ Lib’ Ten’                  4  13   7
                           Ten’ custum’ quam conven’t Ten’ 3  17   0
                           Perquis’ Curiæ                  0   6   2
  Stratton.                Red’ Lib’ Ten’                  1   2   0
                           Conven’ Ten’                    6   5   8
                           Perquis’ Curiæ                  0   3   3
  Tottysdone.              Redd’ Lib’ Ten’                 0   9   5
                           Conven’ Ten’ (Lib’ cum’)        1   0   0
                           Perquis’ Curiæ                  3  12   8
  Estwaye.                 Redd’ Lib’ Ten’                 2  10   0
                           Cust’ et Con’ Ten’              0   9   7
                           Perquis’ Curiæ                  1   8   4
  Boyton.                  Redd’ Lib’ Ten’                 1   3  11
                           Co’ven’ Ten’                    6  16   5
  Bradryche.               Terr’ d’nical’                  8  11   0
  Boyton.                  Perquis’ Curiæ                  0   7   2
  Buclawrenbucke.          Red’ Lib’ Ten’                  0   1   6
                           Conven’ Ten’                   19  15   6¼
                           Perquis’ Curiæ                  0   2  20
  Bonealvey.               Red’ Lib’ Ten’                  1   6  11
                           Conven’ Ten’                    6   4   6
                           Perquis’ Curiæ                  0   6   2
  Halgh land.              Red’ Lib’ Ten’                  1   6   9
                           Ten’ ad val’                    0   3   5
                           Perquis’ Curiæ                  0   9   8
  Treworell.               Red’ Lib’ Ten’                  1   4  10
                           Conven’ Ten’                    0   2   0
  Beyworthye.              Pensio                          0  10   0
  Ayssheby.                Pensio                          0   2   0
  Deweston.                Pensio                          0   5   0
  Loffyngeo.               Pensio                          0   2   0
  S. Egid’.                Pensio                          0   2   0
  Tresmare.                Pensio                          0   1   8
  South Siddenham.         Pensio                          0   1   0
  Lyskerde.                Pensio                          5   0   0
  Talland.                 Pensio                          2   0   0
  Bridgeruell.             Pensio                          0   3   0
  Lynkinhorne.             Pensio                          1   6   8
  Lanest.                  Pensio                          0   3   4
  Lescard.                 Decim’                         25   0   0
  Talland.                 Decim’                         10   0   0
  Wulryngton.              Rector’                        21   9   4
  Egloskery.               Rector’                        21   8   0
  Poughill.                Rector’                         7   0   0
  Stratton.                Rector’                        11   0   0
  S. Genefre.              Rector’                        11   0   0
  Lawanyke.                Rector’                        10   0   0
  Launceston.              Rector’ S’ Thomæ                6   0   0
  Lanest.                  Rector’                         5   0   0
  Inlett.                  Rector’                         6   0   0
  Lankynhorne.             Rector’                        18   0   0
  Launceston.              Rector’ B. Mar’ Magd’           3  13   4
  S’ Steph’ cum Tresmore.  Rector’                        13   0   0
  Tynnyherne.              Portio Xᵐᵉ                      0   6   8
  Tamerton.                Rector’                         9  13   4

Launceston, defended by its Acropolis, and important as a frontier
town, probably remained in all respects the capital of Cornwall so
long as that little state retained its separate existence. Lestwithiel
afterwards became the residence of its nominal Earls, took from
Launceston the sheriffs’ court, and acquired the technical appellation
of the county town.

The assizes, however, continued at Launceston, and the quarter
sessions were opened there; and then, for the convenience of the
western population, adjourned to Truro. Here also was the only county
gaol; till at last the inconvenience and expense became so great, that
about the year 1780, a new, extensive, and commodious gaol, with every
recent improvement, was constructed at Bodmin, where the summer
assizes had been removed under the authority of an act of Parliament
1st Geo. I. c. 45, rendered necessary by the charter of King Richard
II.

But Launceston, only two miles from the boundary of Cornwall, and so
remote from the mining districts, which comprehend the great masses of
population and of litigible property, as to render a journey there in
one day impossible, has been long considered wholly unfitted for the
holding of any court having jurisdiction thoughout the county; while
on the other hand judges and counsel feared to extend their winter’s
progress over the bad roads and hills of Cornwall. The roads are now
improved, and the hills are avoided; and in this year (1834) an order
has been made for holding both assizes in future at the town adjacent
to the prison, nearly in the centre of the county, and where an
increased inducement will be afforded for providing the accommodation
requisite on such occasions.

Launceston itself has received more improvement than almost any other
place as a thoroughfare; the great London road crossing it from east
to west, and one of considerable importance from north to south.

The exit from the east gate was about ten years ago made safe, and
even convenient, from being dangerous in a very high degree; and in
the present year (1834) a road from the north has been wound round the
castle at a very easy ascent, and avoided altogether a hill so steep
as almost to prohibit the use of wheeled carriages.

Launceston not only sent two Members to Parliament; but the long
street, or suburb extending from the foot of the hill at the north
gate, sent two members more under the name of Newport. By the act of
Parliament of 1832, they are both included in a district, returning
one member. Launceston is so amply described by recent writers of the
county history, that it would be useless to repeat what they have
given. The general view of the place is magnificent; and especially
from the new iron bridge, completed this year, across the Tamar at
Polston.

  The parish of St. Mary Magdalen measures 1090 statute acres.
  The present Minister is the Rev. John Rowe, appointed by the
    Corporation in 1808.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3900    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           736    0    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {  1483   |   1758   |   2183   |   2231
    giving an increase of 50 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Doctor Boase observes on the geology, that clayslate, calcareous
schist, limestone, and other rocks belonging to the calcareous series,
constitute the substrature of this parish.

It is quite obvious that the conical mound supporting the keep, as
well as the whole extent of the bass court, are composed of eminences
favourable for defence but improved by art, being scarped in some
places and elevated in others.


     [14] King of the Romans. ED.

     [15] The Black Prince. ED.




ERRATA.


VOLUME II.

  P. 7, line 20, _for_ Poble, _read_ Poole.
  P. 90, line 5 from foot, _for_ pale, _read_ pall.
  P. 123, line 13 from foot, _for_ Pennerks, _read_ Pennecks.
  P. 151, line 5 from foot, _for_ Tress, _read_ Trese.
  P. 203, line 2 from foot, _for_ exepecierint, _read_ expedierint.
  P. 213, line 5 from foot, _for_ Appeninnes, _read_ Apennines.
  P. 215, line 12 from foot, _after_ western, _read_ limit of.
  P. 224, last word, _add_ baptismal name;
          and in first line of p. 225, _after_ Cornwall, _add_ and.
  P. 240, lines 2 from foot; and in p. 241, _for_ Angowe, _read_ Angove.
  P. 250, lines 9 and 11 from foot, _for_ Perth, _read_ Porth.
  P. 282, line 2, _for_ Morsa, _read_ Morva.
  P. 283, line 13, _for_ Leucan and St. Lennan,
                   _read_ Levan and St. Sennan.
  P. 290, line 6 and 7 from foot, _for_ Juest and Jeast,
                                  _read_ Tuest _and_ Teast.
  P. 313, line 2, _for_ Bavi, _read_ Bari.
  P. 319, line 9, _for_ seers, _read_ peers.
  P. 339, line 19, _for_ Glanville, _read_ Grenville.




INDEX

  Abbat, derivation of, ii. 61
  ―――― of St. German’s, ii. 59
  Abbe Tone, or abbey town, ii. 59
  Abbitown, now St. German’s, i. 32
  Abbot, Mr. i. 125
  Abbytone, ii. 62
  Abchurch, St. Mary, rectory, London, i. 72
  Aberdeen, i. 247
  Abergavenny, Lord, i. 87
  Abernethy, now St. Andrew’s, iv. 105
  Abingdon abbey, i. 342
  Abraham, i. 414
  Acacia armata, iv. 181
  ―――― dealbata, iv. 183
  ―――― lopantha, iv. 183
  Achaia in Greece, iv. 161
  Achelous, the river god, ii. 161
  Achym, William, monument to, iii. 292.――Thomas, family arms, and
    etymology of the name, iv. 23
  Acland, Sir John, iii. 271. Sir Thomas, 42, 274. Sir T. D. 271.――Of
    Killerton, iv. 16. Colonel, 185.――Family, ii. 416
  Acre, comparison of the Cornish, Saxon, and Norman, iii. 388
  Acres, the number of in Cornwall, Appendix I. iv. 177
  Act of Parliament for improving Truro, iv. 80
  Acton castle, iii. 311
  Acton of Acton Scot, i. 400
  Addis, i. 417.――John and William, iii. 38
  Adelredus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Adelstowe, iii. 277, 278 _bis_
  Adis of Plymouth, i. 420
  Adlington, John, iv. 77
  Admiralty, Nicholas Trevanion, commissioner of the, iv. 116
  Adobed, Reginald, i. 134
  Adour, river, iv. 159
  Adredus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Adrian, Emperor, i. 393――iv. 117
  Adrian, Pope, ii. 212
  Adriatic sea, iv. 172
  Adulphus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Advent, alias St. Anne parish, i. 62, 129, 132――ii. 401 _bis_,
    408――iii. 222
  ADVENT parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, boundaries,
    etymology of name, saint, church patron, land tax, i. 1. By
    Tonkin, name, Trethym. By Whitaker, etymology, saint’s history 2.
    By Lysons, villages, manor of Trelagoe. By the Editor, statistics.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 3
  Adwen, St. history of, i. 2
  Æschylus, iii. 34
  Africa, iii. 187 _bis_
  Agapanthus umbellatus, iv. 181
  Agar, Mrs. i. 384.――Hon. C. B. ii. 381. Mr. 57. Mrs. 197, 258,
    348.――Mr. iv. 44
  Agincourt, battle of, iii. 316
  Agnes, St. iii. 312, 313
  ―――― St. church, iii. 176
  ―――― St. island, ii. 358――iv. 173, 174. By Leland, Appendix, 266.
    Its extent 175.――Lighthouse upon, ii. 358――iv. 175. Its latitude
    and longitude, and time of high water 175
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 234, 235, 317, 402――iii. 380
  AGNES, St. parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, land tax,
    church, i. 4. Saint’s history 5. Feast, Carne Buryanacht, St.
    Agnes ball 6. Manors and seats, Mithian 7. Trevellis, Trevawnance
    8. By Tonkin, etymology of Pider, Kyvere Ankou, Trevannence; the
    same from Lysons, Breanis, description and productions 10. By
    Lysons, harbour at Trevannence Porth 11. Market, Porth Chapel,
    Chapel at Mola, almshouses and schools 12. By the Editor, remarks
    on the Tonkin family, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 13. The
    beacon 14
  Agnes’ St. ball or plague, i. 6
  ―――― St. beacon, i. 10. Geology 14. Position and height 15
  ―――― St. well, i. 12
  Agonal, iii. 434
  Agricola, Tacitus’s Life of, iii. 162
  Agricolaus, i. 52
  Ahab, King, i. 329
  Aikin, Miss, ii. 77
  Ailmer, Earl of Cornwall, i. 73――iii. 462
  Ainton, Thomas de, iii. 354
  Aire, a farm of Mr. Stephens’s where he and his family shut
    themselves up from the plague and escaped, ii. 271
  Alan River, i. 74, 94, 115, 153, 367, 371, 372 _ter._, 373, 375――ii.
    402 _ter._――iii. 277, 334
  Albalanda family, ii. 300, 302, 303 _bis_, 305――iii. 213
  Alban, St. the Briton, ii. 64, 75. His Shrine 74
  Alban’s, St. town, why named, general council of British clergy at,
    St. German preached at, ii. 64. St. German’s chapel at 65
  ―――― St. battle of, ii. 260――iii. 234
  Albemarle, Duke of, ii. 27, 28, 94. His letter of thanks to Capt.
    Penrose 28
  Albigenses, i. 311
  Albiniaco, Philip de, ii. 428
  Alderscombe, account of, ii. 347, 351
  Aldestowe, iii. 278 _bis_
  Aldwinick, ii. 77
  Aldwyn, Bishop of Lindisfarne, i. 290 _bis_
  Alein, by Leland, iv. 262
  Alexander, John, ii. 160
  ―――― the Third, Pope, iii. 115
  Alexandria, ii. 81――iii. 187 _bis_.――St. Catharine born at, ii. 37
  Alfred, King, i. 290 _ter._――ii. 155――iii. 74, 241, 262. The Great,
    visited St. Neot, who appeared to him after death 262. Founded
    Oxford by his advice 263
  Alfridus or Alfricus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Alfwaldus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Algar, Earl of Cornwall, i. 73 _bis_, 74, 94 _bis_, 95――iii. 462
  Algarus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Algerine pirates stranded in Mount’s Bay, iii. 97
  Algiers, governor of, ii. 100
  Alien priories, their origin, iv. 99. Suppression 101
  All Saints’ day, ii. 150, 287
  All Souls’ college, Oxford, ii. 147, 227, 228――iii. 123, 155, 252, 344
  Allan family, ii. 286
  Allan, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Allanson, Rev. George, of St. Tudy, iv. 95
  Allen, Ralph, history of, i. 56
  ―――― Mr. of Bath, ii. 33. Thomas 233
  ―――― St. iv. 24, 75
  ―――― St. parish, i. 202, 393, 404, 417――ii. 315, 318――iii. 267, 313.
    Living of 300
  ALLEN, St. parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, i. 15.
    Endowment, first fruits, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land
    tax, Gwarnike 16. Etymology 17. Treonike, tale of a stolen child,
    families originating from church offices, Tretheris chapel 18. By
    Tonkin, Gwairnick, Boswellick, Nancarrow 19. Gwerick, Trerice,
    Trefronick, Talcarne. By Lysons, Villages of Lane and Zela 20. By
    the Editor, name and feast, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 21
  Allett, i. 415
  Allin, John, iv. 18
  Allington, South, manor, iii. 436
  Allworthy, Fielding’s, i. 57
  Almes Pool Meadow, ii. 41
  Alonzo, King of Castille, i. 311
  Aloysoa citra odora, iv. 181
  Alps, iii. 121, 186.――Miniature model of, ii. 150
  Alpsius, Duke of Devon and Cornwall, ii. 420
  Alric, Earl, stole the body of St. Neot, iii. 263
  Als, John de, i. 144
  Als manor in Buryan, ii. 118
  Alse, i. 144. De Alse of Lelant ibid.
  Alsius, Duke of Devonshire and Cornwall, iii. 415
  Altar cloth, curious, i. 157
  Altarnun parish, i. 62, 129, 159, 167, 174, 196, 197, 201, 257, 304,
    308, 317――ii. 36――iv. 48, 68, 69, 70 Altarnunæ, Alternun, iii. 36,
    39, 260, 335.――Alternunn, ii. 229, 377
  ALTARNUN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, i. 21. Ancient
    state, first fruits, patron, incumbent, land tax, etymology,
    nunnery 22. Trelawny, Peter Jowle 23. Instances of longevity 24.
    By Tonkin, etymology. By the Editor, St. Nun, St. Nun’s well 24.
    St. Nun’s day, extent, villages, fairs, church-tower, statistics.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 25. Stone quarry, Endsleigh cottage 26
  Alured, Col. iv. 186
  Alvacot village, iv. 41
  Alverton manor, ii. 282――iii. 78, 90, 91, 92, 426. Account of 79,
    90.――Lord of, ii. 130
  Alvorton, iv. 164
  Alwalfus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Alwolfus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Amadis, John, of Plymouth, i. 348
  Amall manor, iv. 52
  Amalphy in Naples, St. Andrew’s body at, iv. 101
  Amaneth, ii. 203, 211
  Amator, St. Bishop of Auxerre, ii. 73 _bis_
  Ambrose, St. ii. 279
  ―――― Well, i. 247
  Ambrosius, Aurelius, i. 326
  Amellibrea belongs to the Editor, ancient buildings there, iv. 54
  America, iii. 183.――Packets for, receive their despatches at
    Falmouth, ii. 11. Separated from England 245. War with 245,
    267.――No heaths in, iii. 173
  ―――― South, i. 164――iii. 205
  Ammonian harmony, iii. 408
  Amorites, Kings of, ii. 285
  “Amorous Fantasme, a Tragi-Comedy,” iv. 98
  Amural, ii. 367
  Amy, Cotton, of Botreaux Castle, Anne, Grace, and Mr. i.
    134.――Edward and Rev. James, ii. 49.――Cotton, iii. 235, 236.
    Edward 232. Grace 235, 236. Rev. James 232, 235, 236. Mr.
    235.――Family, iv. 62
  Amye, sister of King Arthur, i. 332
  Amyll manor, iv. 55
  Amys, of Botreaux castle, the coheir of, iv. 45
  Anabaptists, iv. 73
  Andegavia, now Angiers, i. 335 _ter._
  Andrew, Anne, and John, ii. 253.――Richard, iii. 387
  ―――― of Trevellance, Jane or Anne, John, iii. 326, 333
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 189――iii. 387.――Mr. ii. 354
  Andrew, St. the Apostle, his history, iv. 100. Occasion of his
    adoption as patron of Scotland 105
  ―――― St. church in Stratton, ii. 427
  ―――― St. church, Holborn, ii. 267
  ―――― St. monastery, university, and city, iv. 105
  ―――― St. priory, i. 167
  Andromache, iii. 420
  Anecdotes of Heraldry by a Lady, iii. 137
  Angarder chapel, iii. 314
  Angarrack, iii. 343
  Ange, Rev. Mr. ii. 24
  Angelo, St., Marq. of, in Spain, descended from the Tregians, iii. 381
  Angiers in France, iv. 100, 144
  Anglesey, i. 295 _bis_
  Angove, iv. 128
  ―――― family, ii. 236, 241 _bis_. Abel 241. Reginald 236, 240.
    Etymology 236.――Richard, iii. 387
  Anhele Nunnery, Truro, ii. 315
  An Marogeth Arvowed, account of, iii. 430
  Anhell, iv. 73
  Anjou, Angiers the capital of, iv. 105
  “Annals, Firbisse’s,” iv. 146
  Anne, Princess, called Anne Eat-all, said to have died from
    overeating, ii. 15
  ―――― Queen, ii. 98――iii. 62 _bis_, 145, 176, 201, 249, 297
    _ter._――iv. 21 _bis_, 23, 116.――The Pitt diamond offered to, i.
    68.――Her last Parliament, ii. 98, 287, 348
  ――――’s, Queen, bounty, ii. 93
  ―――― St. i. 157
  ―――― St. parish, _see Advent_
  Annual celebrations natural, ii. 288
  Annunciation, i. 157
  Ansbury, diocese of, ii. 81
  Anson, Commodore, iii. 205
  Anthology of Greek Epigrams, iv. 87
  Anthony family, ii. 275
  Anthony parish, ii. 250――iii. 436
  ―――― East manor, i. 33――ii. 252 _ter._――Description of, i. 37
  ―――― East parish, ii. 252――iii. 101
  ―――― St. iii. 113. The patron of fishermen 91
  ―――― St. of Egypt, history of, i. 28, 29. Festival 31
  ―――― St. of Padua, history of, i. 29. Festival 31
  ―――― manor, iii. 209
  ―――― parish, ii. 1, 2, 17, 50 _bis_, 319――iii. 110 _bis_, 128, 380, 456
  ANTHONY ST., in Kerrier parish, feast, i. 31. Boundaries, situation,
    ancient state, first fruits, incumbent 32. Land tax, East Anthony,
    and family of Carew 33. Intsworth 36. By Tonkin, East Anthony. By
    Editor, Rt. Hon. Reginald Pole Carew, statistics 37. Church
    monuments, population, incumbent, Geology 38
  ―――― in Kerrier Parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, i. 38. Incumbent, land tax, Saint, Trewothike,
    Roscruge, Denis and Great Denis 39. By Tonkin, Little Dinas, the
    last place that held out for Charles 1st. By Editor, statistics,
    antiquities, Geology 40
  ―――― in Powder parish, ii. 275, 281――iii. 395. Rocks similar to
    those in Gerans, ii. 58
  ―――― in Powder parish, situation, boundaries, i. 26. Ancient state,
    history, Rules of Canons Augustine 27. First fruits, patron, land
    tax, saint’s history and name, Plase, St. Anthony Point 28. By
    Tonkin, Boswartha, Porth. By the Editor, history of St. Anthony of
    Egypt, and of St. Anthony of Padua 29. Legend of the latter, by
    Dr. Darwin 30. Feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 31
  ―――― Point, i. 28
  ―――― Prior of, ii. 51 _bis_. Priory 277
  Anthyllis hermannia, iv. 181
  Anticiodorum, St. German, Bishop of, ii. 59
  Antiocheis, i. 342
  Antiochesis, i. 325
  Antiquarian Society, communication of Mr. Arundell upon Theodore
    Paleologus to, ii. 365
  “Antiquities of Cornwall,” ii. 338――iv. 30
  Antirrhinum monspessulanum, iii. 63
  Antis, John, i. 319
  Antonies, St. by Leland, iv. 270, 289
  Antron, account of, iii. 445
  ―――― of Antron, family, iii. 445
  Antwerp, iii. 67. Nuns from, received at Lanhearne 150
  Antyer Deweth, iii. 431
  Anvilla, Robert de Edune, iv. 77, 82
  Anwena, Bishop of Dorchester, iv. 137
  Apeley, i. 223
  Apennines, ii. 213
  Apollo, i. 295
  Apparition, treasure discovered by, i. 162
  Aquitaine, i. 335――iv. 145
  Arabia, iii. 187
  Arcedekne, Thomas de, i. 340.――Alice, John and Thomas, Lords, of
    Warine Family, iii. 405
  Archæologia, iii. 244
  Archdeacon of East Anthony, Thomas, Walter, and arms, i. 33. And of
    Haccomb, Philippa, and Sir Warren 33, 64, 262
  Arche, Sir Richard, i. 168
  Archedecon family, iii. 44. Thomas, Lord de 405
  Archer of Trelaske, N. S. ii. 243――iii. 38 _bis_. Mr. and his
    brother 338. Family and their monuments 37
  ―――― of Trelowick, John, i. 417. John 420. Rev. Mr. 417. William,
    arms 420
  Arcturus, i. 342
  Ardent, a 64 gun ship taken by the French and Spanish combined
    fleets in Plymouth Sound, ii. 246
  Ardeverauian, by Leland, iv. 266
  Ardevermeur, by Leland, iv. 273
  Ardevon parish, ii. 208
  Ardfert, diocese of, iii. 434
  Argand lamps in the Lizard Lighthouses, ii. 359
  Arian clergy, i. 338
  ―――― heresy, iii. 59
  Arianism, i. 115, 252――iii. 64. St. Dye opposed to, ii. 131
  Arians, i. 294――ii. 63. St. Hilary, a violent opponent of 168, 169.
    Furious hostility of St. Ambrose against 279.――St. Martin opposed
    them, iii. 122
  Aristolochia sempervirens, iv. 181
  Aristophanes, ii. 265
  Aristotle, ii. 408
  Arius, i. 305.――His heresy, ii. 63
  Armagh, St., Malachy Archbishop of, ii. 225
  Armes in Castle Cairden, iv. 262
  Armorica, i. 115――iii. 336 _bis_.――Or Little Britain, iv. 157
  Armorican tongue, iii. 114
  Arms of Achym, iv. 23
  ―――― Albalonda, ii. 303
  ―――― Arcedekne, i. 33――iii. 405
  ―――― Archer, i. 420
  ―――― Arthur, King, i. 336
  ―――― Arundell, i. 162, 405――iii. 142, 149, 270 _bis_――iv.
    72.――Crest, i. 405
  ―――― Baldwin, iii. 66
  ―――― Barret, ii. 89
  ―――― Basset, ii. 239
  ―――― Bastard, i. 320
  ―――― Beare, i. 405――iv. 22
  ―――― Beauchamp, ii. 130 _bis_
  ―――― Beel, ii. 252
  ―――― Bellot, i. 302
  ―――― Bennet, iii. 3
  ―――― Berkeley, ii. 11――iv. 14
  ―――― Betenson, iii. 23
  ―――― Bevill, i. 17――iv. 22, 72
  ―――― Bickton, i. 412
  ―――― Billing, iv. 95
  ―――― Blewet, i. 210 _bis_――iv. 95
  ―――― Bochym, ii. 131, 302
  ―――― Bodrigan, ii. 107 _bis_――iii. 119
  ―――― Boggan, ii. 320
  ―――― Bone, ii. 353
  ―――― Bonithon, i. 302――iii. 226
  ―――― Borlase, i. 18――iii. 84
  ―――― Boscawen, i. 140
  ―――― Bosistow, iii. 35
  ―――― Bowden, ii. 303
  ―――― Bray, ii. 311
  ―――― Budeoxhed, i. 348
  ―――― Buller, iii. 249
  ―――― Caddock, Earl of Cornw., i. 203
  ―――― Call, i. 162
  ―――― Camelford borough, ii. 404
  ―――― Carlyon, i. 54
  ―――― Carmenow, iii. 129――iv. 72
  ―――― Carne, i. 10
  ―――― Carnsew, ii. 337
  ―――― Carrow, i. 35
  ―――― Carter, i. 223
  ―――― Carverth, ii. 94, 337
  ―――― Cavall, ii. 335 _bis_
  ―――― Chamond, ii. 414
  ―――― Champernown, ii. 254 _quat._
  ―――― Cheyney, iv. 43
  ―――― Chynoweth, i. 292
  ―――― Coke, i. 395, 396
  ―――― Coplestone, ii. 293
  ―――― Coren, iii. 3
  ―――― Coryton, iii. 162
  ―――― Coswarth, i. 211
  ―――― Cottell, ii. 352
  ―――― Courtenay, iv. 96
  ―――― Crane, iii. 387
  ―――― Damerell, iii. 61
  ―――― D’Angers, iii. 226
  ―――― Davies, i. 361
  ―――― Davis, i. 144
  ―――― Dawnay, iii. 437, 438
  ―――― Dinham, i. 170
  ―――― Dodson, i. 412
  ―――― Dundagell borough, i. 323
  ―――― Edgecumbe, iii. 103――iv. 72
  ―――― Egleshayle, i. 374
  ―――― Erisey, ii. 116――iii. 419
  ―――― Ferrers, iii. 134
  ―――― Fitzroy, ii. 11
  ―――― Fitz-William, ii. 410
  ―――― Flammock, i. 85
  ―――― Fowey town, ii. 38
  ―――― German’s, St. priory, ii. 63
  ―――― Glynn, i. 172――ii. 142
  ―――― Godolphin, i. 124――ii. 335
  ―――― Grosse, iii. 249
  ―――― Hare, i. 406
  ―――― Harris, ii. 122
  ―――― Hawes, ii. 300, 316
  ―――― Hawkins, i. 45
  ―――― Heale, i. 107
  ―――― Heart, ii. 152
  ―――― Hele, iv. 152
  ―――― Helston borough, ii. 156
  ―――― Hemley, i. 384
  ―――― Hext, i. 44
  ―――― Hill, ii. 136――iii. 191
  ―――― Hobbs, ii. 54
  ―――― Hoblyn, i. 223
  ―――― Hooker, iii. 203
  ―――― Howeis, ii. 304
  ―――― Ives, St. borough, ii. 258
  ―――― Ives, St. town, ii. 271
  ―――― Keate, i. 224
  ―――― Kekewich, i. 372――ii. 410
  ―――― Kelliow, ii. 399
  ―――― Kellyow, i. 320
  ―――― Kemell, i. 265
  ―――― Kempe, ii. 54
  ―――― Kendall, i. 319
  ―――― Kestell, iii. 112, 113
  ―――― Killigrew, ii. 7
  ―――― Killiton borough, ii. 310
  ―――― King, i. 204
  ―――― King John, iv. 71
  ―――― Lambron, iii. 316
  ―――― Lamellin, ii. 411
  ―――― Lanyon, ii. 142, 143
  ―――― Laughairne, ii. 316
  ―――― Leveale, i. 143
  ―――― Ley, i. 396
  ―――― Littleton, iii. 227
  ―――― Long, i. 378
  ―――― Looe, West, borough, iv. 21
  ―――― Manaton, ii. 231
  ―――― Marney, iii. 65
  ―――― Matthew, ii. 337
  ―――― Mawe’s, St. borough, ii. 276
  ―――― Mawgan, iii. 148
  ―――― Megara bishopric, i. 75, 94
  ―――― Milliton, i. 125
  ―――― Mohun, i. 351――iv. 96
  ―――― Molesworth, i. 370
  ―――― Morton, iv. 3
  ―――― Moyle, ii. 67
  ―――― Murth, iv. 25
  ―――― Mydhop, i. 320
  ―――― Nance, ii. 239――iv. 129
  ―――― Nanfan, i. 408
  ―――― Nanskevall, or Typpet, iv. 139
  ―――― Nansperian, i. 349
  ―――― Neville, cognizance, ii. 38
  ―――― Nicholls, ii. 339
  ―――― Noye, iii. 145, 151 _bis_
  ―――― Opie, i. 399
  ―――― Oxford, i. 58.――City, ii. 404
  ―――― Paleolagus, ii. 365
  ―――― Parker, i. 136――ii. 12 _bis_
  ―――― Parkings, iv. 140
  ―――― Payne, ii. 198
  ―――― Paynter, i. 349, 350
  ―――― Pendarves, i. 161――ii. 93, 98
  ―――― Pendre, i. 143
  ―――― Penkivell, i. 297
  ―――― Penrose, iii. 443
  ―――― Penwarne, iii. 75, 77
  ―――― Peter, iii. 176
  ―――― Peverell, i. 368
  ―――― Polkinghorne, ii. 142
  ―――― Polwhele, i. 205
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 297
  ―――― Porter, iii. 66
  ―――― Prideaux, ii. 242――iii. 56, 279
  ―――― Prout, iii. 66
  ―――― Pye, iii. 449
  ―――― Quarme, i. 256, 422
  ―――― Rame, iii. 374
  ―――― Randyll, i. 421――ii. 353
  ―――― Rashleigh, i. 43
  ―――― Ravenscroft, i. 374
  ―――― Renaudin, iii. 303
  ―――― Reskymer, iii. 133――iv. 96
  ―――― Richard, King of the Romans, ii. 8――iii. 169
  ―――― Robarts, Earl of Radnor, ii. 380
  ―――― Robins, iv. 117
  ―――― Robinson, iii. 422
  ―――― Rogers, iii. 76
  ―――― Romans, _see Richard_
  ―――― Roscrow, ii. 337
  ―――― Rosogan, i. 400
  ―――― Rous, i. 313
  ―――― Sandys, iii. 158 _bis_
  ―――― Sargeaux, ii. 395
  ―――― Scawen, ii. 68
  ―――― Scobell, i. 44
  ―――― Scobhall, i. 44
  ―――― Scrope, iii. 129, 130
  ―――― Searle, i. 37
  ―――― Seccombe, i. 417
  ―――― Serischall, iii. 225
  ―――― Seriseaux, iii. 225
  ―――― Seyntaubyn, i. 262
  ―――― Silly, iii. 237
  ―――― Slanning, iii. 76
  ―――― Smith, i. 250
  ―――― Speccott, i. 379
  ―――― Spour, ii. 227
  ―――― Sprye, i. 28
  ―――― Tencreek, i. 255
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 337――iii. 326
  ―――― Thoms, iii. 125
  ―――― Tonkin, i. 9, 13――iii. 315
  ―――― Treago, i. 249
  ―――― Treby, i. 412
  ―――― Trecarrell, iii. 438
  ―――― Tredenham, iii. 361 _bis_
  ―――― Tredinick, i. 116――iv. 95
  ―――― Treffreye, ii. 43
  ―――― Trefusis, iii. 318, 227
  ―――― Tregagle, iii. 265
  ―――― Tregarthyn, ii. 110
  ―――― Tregeare, i. 263, 264
  ―――― Tregian, iii. 357
  ―――― Tregonell, i. 247
  ―――― Tregony borough, i. 296
  ―――― Tregoze, i. 39
  ―――― Trehaire, iii. 355
  ―――― Trehawke, iii. 169
  ―――― Trelawder, iv. 95
  ―――― Trelawney, i. 23――iii. 169, 295――iv. 96
  ―――― Trembleth, iii. 405
  ―――― Tremere, ii. 385
  ―――― Trenance, iv. 161
  ―――― Trencreek, i. 256
  ―――― Trengove, iv. 129
  ―――― Trenowith, ii. 107
  ―――― Trenowth, iv. 72
  ―――― Trenwith, ii. 259
  ―――― Trethurfe, ii. 353
  ―――― Trevanion, iii. 200
  ―――― Trevillian, i. 198
  ―――― Trevisa, i. 314
  ―――― Trewhythenick, i. 207
  ―――― Trewinard, i. 136, 346
  ―――― Trewolla, ii. 110
  ―――― Trewoofe, i. 142
  ―――― Trewoolla, i. 206
  ―――― Treworthen, iii. 269
  ―――― Trewren, i. 237
  ―――― Tripcony, ii. 124
  ―――― Typpet, iv. 139
  ―――― Uter Pendragon, i. 326
  ―――― Vaughan, i. 39
  ―――― Vere, ii. 185
  ―――― Vincent, i. 205――ii. 227 _bis_
  ―――― Vivian, i. 76, 94, 222
  ―――― Vyvyan, iii. 135
  ―――― Walesborough, iii. 116
  ―――― Wayte, i. 244
  ―――― Webber, ii. 336
  ―――― William, i. 53, 396
  ―――― Williams, iii. 145 _bis_, 355 _bis_, 356
  ―――― Winter, ii. 304
  ―――― Woolridge, i. 256
  ―――― Worth, iii. 60
  ―――― Wrey, i. 411
  ―――― Yeo, ii. 87
  Army, argument upon, ii. 76
  Arrish Mow, ii. 57
  Arscott, Denis, iv. 157. Tristram 41. Mrs. 157. Family 127, 157
  ―――― of Devon, ii. 336
  ―――― Mevagissey, Rev. John, iii. 195
  ―――― Tetcot, i. 370, 375
  Arsenic, process of extracting, iii. 305
  Arthur, Francis, i. 282
  ―――― King, i. 305, 323, 339 _ter._, 341, 372, 404――ii. 50, 214, 259,
    308, 403 _bis_.――His parentage, i. 326, 331. Birth 332. History
    333. Death 337. His arms 336. Lines upon him 325. Merlin’s
    prophecy of him 333. His tomb, and finding of his body 337. Lord
    Bacon’s opinion of him 340.――The British Hector, slain near
    Camelford, in battle against Mordred, verses upon, ii. 402. Born
    on the same shore. Stone bearing his name 403――The spot where he
    received his death wound marked by a stone, iii. 236
  ―――― King, acts of, iii. 163
  ―――― Prince, Romance of, i. 342
  ―――― Duke of Brittany, heir of Richard’s crown, ii. 178
  ――――’s admirals, i. 338
  ―――― castle, i. 343
  ―――― round table, i. 338
  ―――― stone, account of, i. 220
  ―――― table and tressels of gold, i. 338
  Artificial reef, iii. 379
  Artire river, iii. 457
  Artocarpus, or breadfruit tree, iv. 45
  Arun river, iii. 206
  Arundell, or Arundale in Sussex, iii. 206
  ―――― i. 113, 121, 125, 167, 198, 210, 213, 298, 317 _quat._, 318,
    319, 386, 392, 420, 421 _bis_. Humphrey 301. John de 405. Sir John
    213. Sir John 218. Margery 38. Renphry 125, 418. Sir Renphry
    213.――Family, ii. 128, 354, 415. Their property in Cornwall, sale
    of 147. Rev. F. V. J. 140, 365. Rector of Landulph 387. General
    192, 193, 196, 197. Geffery 195. Humphrey, Governor of St.
    Michael’s Mount 198. Humphrey the rebel 326. Jane 124. John 9.
    Lord, sale of his property 128. Richard Lord, governor of
    Pendennis castle 14. William 123. Mr. 123, 124.――Sir John, iii.
    332, 396. Richard 267. Thomas 141. Lord 343, 344. Miss 80, 369.
    Mr. 201. Family 83, 85, 137, 240, 269, 333, 343, 445. Arms 142.
    Monuments to 151. Origin of name 142, 150. Property 353.――Sir
    John, iv. 153. Lord 106. Miss 116. A younger branch of the family
    16. Arms 72
  ―――― of Caryhayes, heir of, iii. 202
  ―――― Clifton family, ii. 372. Lived at Clifton ibid. Alexander, Sir
    John, Mary 375. Thomas, Sir Thomas 371, 373. William 375
  ―――― St. Colomb Major, Elizabeth, iii. 318 _bis_. Thomas ibid.
  ―――― Gloucestershire, iii. 142
  ―――― Lanherne, i. 218, 223, 405 _ter._ Edmond 121 _bis_. John,
    Bishop of Exeter 218. Sir John 415. Sir John or Renfry 120. Lord
    170. Renfry 218. Crest 405.――Humphrey, ii. 191, 192. Sir John 145,
    146 _ter._ Family 127, 147, 148, 149.――Sir Edmund, iii. 316.
    Edward 318. Elizabeth 140, 316 _bis_, 317. John 140 _quater_. Sir
    John, _bis_. Sir John, Sheriff 141. John, Bishop of Litchfield and
    Coventry, memoir of, ib. Sir John, the last possessor 142, 150.
    Sir John 143 _bis_, 148, 196, 201, 316 _bis_, 339. John de 269.
    Ralph 268, 269 _bis_. Renfry and Renfry 141. Sir Renfry 316 _bis_.
    Renfry 316. Richard B. 141. Miss 141. Mr. 140, 357. Family 104,
    140, 145, 268, 274, 391. Character of 150. Arms 149, 270. Lines on
    149. Name 142. Called “The Great Arundells” 140, 149,
    150.――Family, iv. 3, 103, 106, 161
  ―――― Lanheme and Wardour family, iv. 154
  ―――― Menadarva, i. 161, _ter._ John ib. Arms 162.――Family, iii. 85
  ―――― Sythney, i. 65
  ―――― Talverne, i. 222. John 65. Sir John 123. Sir Thomas 346,
    356.――Tolverne Grace, iii. 183. Sir John ib. 325 _ter._ Family
    104, 142, 149――ii. 256, 257, 276 _bis_, 279, 280, 336. Sir John,
    obtained a pardon for Lady Killigrew 6. Sir Thomas 170
  ―――― Tregarthin and Caryhayes, iv. 116
  ―――― Trembleth, i. 213, 405.――Mr. ii. 146.――In St. Ervan, Sir R.
    iii. 149. Family 140
  ―――― Tremodart in Duloe, Thomas, iv. 34 _ter._ Family 34 _bis_
  ―――― Trerice, i. 17, 19, 20 _bis_, 210, 211, 319. John 161. Sir John
    415. Lord 415.――John, father of Richard, called John of Tilbury,
    governor of Pendennis castle, besieged there by parliament forces,
    ii. 13. Sir John 185. Sent to reduce the Earl of Oxford at St.
    Michael’s Mount 183. Stormed it, killed, and his troops repulsed,
    his fortune told 184. Richard, his marriage 13.――Anne, iii. 199,
    201. John 199, 201, 269. Sir John 213. Sir John, story of 274. Sir
    John, called “The Tilbury” and “John for the King” 270, 274. John
    Lord 267, 325. Monument to Margaret his wife 271. Ralph 270. Sir
    Richard first Lord, and his grandson 274. Miss 141. Family 104.
    Arms and vault 270.――Family, iv. 13, 16
  ―――― Trethall, John and Prudence, ii. 320
  ―――― Trevethick family, iii. 142, 149.――Or Trevithick, Thomas, i.
    223 _bis_. Family 223
  ―――― Wardour, Lords, iii. 142, 149, 150 _bis_. Lord 352 _bis_. Henry
    8th Lord, sold his Cornish property 151
  Arundell castle, iii. 142 _bis_.
  ―――― Ederick, Saxon Earl of, iii. 142
  ―――― town, iii. 142 _bis_.
  Arundo aremaria, iii. 6
  Arwennak, by Leland, iv. 270
  Arwinick, i. 398――iii. 75.――Manor, etymology, ii. 4, 17.
    Inhabitants, house built by Sir John Killigrew 5. Present
    possessor 6
  Arwinike, i. 136, 137
  Arworthal manor, account of, iii. 302
  Asa, William, ii. 192
  Asan, brother-in-law of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 367
  Asaph, St. Jeffery of Monmouth, Bishop of, i. 342
  Asche, by Leland, iv. 281
  Ashburnham, Lord, iv. 14
  Ashmolean museum, i. 300――iii. 50, 52
  Asia, the Lesser, iv. 172
  ―――― Minor, the castles of, ii. 423
  Asparagus officinalis, iii. 260
  Asperville, Oliver de, iv. 28
  Asshe, by Leland, iv. 291
  Assium, or Assissum, i. 80, 81, 174
  Aster argophyllus, iv. 181
  Astle, Thomas, ancient MS. in his library, iv. 190
  Astley, ii. 186
  Astronomer royal, ii. 222, 223
  Atery, ii. 418
  Athanasian Creed, i. 252
  Athelstan, Bishop of Cornwall, his see, iii. 415. His successors
    ibid.
  ―――― the 2nd Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  ―――― King, i. 139, 240――ii. 59, 60, 61, 69, 158――iii. 277, 278
    _bis_, 322 _bis_, 430, 433, 462――iv. 40. Separated Devon from
    Cornwall 104
  Athenodorus, St. History of, i. 386, 388
  Atlantic Ocean, i. 388――ii. 283――iii. 98, 426, 429, 430
  Attall Saracen, i. 414
  Attica, iv. 161
  Atticus, a Greek geographer, ii. 172
  Attornies, Cornish, ii. 253
  Atwell, Rev. Hugh, i. 421.――John, ii. 189
  Auburne, Nicholas, ii. 189
  Aubyn, St., family, i. 32, 93――iv. 54, _see Seynt Aubyn_
  Audley, James Touchet, Lord, i. 86, beheaded 87
  Augmentation office, ii. 412, 425――iii. 286, 293――iv. 113.――Copy
    from, ii. 429. Roll preserved in 87
  Augo, William de, Archdeacon of Cornwall, ii. 426
  Augustine, i. 410
  ―――― St. i. 312.――Relates miracles of St. Hilary, ii. 169
  ―――― black monks of, iii. 111
  ―――― bull, iv. 100
  ―――― canons, i. 27, 73 _bis_――iii. 456. College of in St. Colomb
    141. Priory of 458
  ―――― friars, i. 83
  Augustinum, iv. 117, or Autun 121
  Augustus, Emperor, i. 386
  ―――― title of, assumed by the Emperor Charles VIII. 369
  Auld Lang Syne, iii. 298
  Aulerci, several places in Gallia so called, iv. 116
  ―――― Branovices, ib.
  ―――― Cenomanni, now Mans, ib.
  ―――― Diablentres, ib.
  ―――― Eburorices, in Normandy, ib.
  Auncell, Richard, ii. 209
  Aurelian, Emperor, i. 214 _bis_, 236, 388
  Aurivale, ii. 428
  Austell, William de, and his arms, i. 42
  ―――― St. parish, i. 52 _bis_, 59, 106, 128, 152, 416, 418, 423――ii.
    314――iii. 47, 55, 58 _bis_, 198, 253, 391, 394, 395, 450, 455――iv.
    54, 104, 110
  AUSTELL, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    etymology, history of church, patronage, incumbent, i. 41.
    Impropriation, value of Benefice, land tax, divisions, Treverbyn
    42. Penrice, Menagwins 43. Roseundle, Roscorla, Trenaran, Merther,
    story of Mr. Laa 44. Hawkins family, Towington, Upcott family 45.
    By Norden, Polruddon. By Tonkin, Tewington 46. Pentwan, Pelniddon,
    Trenorren. By the Editor, rise owing to mines and china clay 47.
    Villages, church and tower, font, almshouse 48. Antiquities,
    statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 49. Elvan courses,
    streamworks 50
  Austell, St. river, i. 47
  ―――― town, i. 41, 45, 48――ii. 47――iii. 121, 190, 195, 196.――Market
    and fairs, i. 42. Formerly a village, great road through, export,
    harbour at Seaporth 47. Railroad finished 1832, 48.――Road to Fowey
    from, iv. 109
  Austelles, St. by Leland, iv. 274
  Austen, J. T. representative of the Treffrye family, a spirited and
    judicious miner, ii. 46
  ―――― place in Fowey, J. T. iii. 348 _bis_.
  Austin canons, cell of in Lancell’s parish, ii. 415 _bis_.
  ―――― St. iii. 167, 284, 285.――Bishop of Rochester, ii. 279, 287, 288
    _bis_.
  ―――― Abbey, Canterbury, iii. 114, 115
  Austol’s, St. by Leland, iv. 289
  Austria, Leopold Archduke of, made Richard 1st prisoner, ii. 178
  Auvergne, ii. 86
  Auxerre, diocese of, ii. 75
  ―――― St. Amator, Bishop of, ii. 73 _bis_.
  ―――― St. German, Bishop of, ii. 63, 64
  ―――― oratory of St. Morice at, ii. 75
  Auxona, R. ii. 64
  Avalde, i. 407
  Avallon, i. 337 _bis_.
  Avant, i. 223
  Ave, etymology, i. 182
  Ave-Mary lane, ib.
  Avery family, i. 204 _bis_, 224.――Captain, a celebrated buccaneer,
    supposed to have buried treasure, ii. 128.――Mr. iii. 235
    _bis_.――William, iv. 77
  Avoh beacon, iii. 394, 401
  Avon river, in Somersetshire, ii. 292, 293
  Avranches, Augustine, Bishop of, ii. 208
  Axceolanum, or Hexham, the see of, iv. 42
  Axminster, i. 328
  ―――― hundred, iv. 15
  Aylesbury, i. 258
  Ayleworth, Captain, iii. 183
  Ayre, St. iii. 55
  Ayscough, Sir George, his engagement with the Dutch, ii. 25.
    Entertained at Le Feock by Captain Penrose 26. Sailed to the Sound 27
  Ayscough’s Catalogue, iii. 154
  Ayssheby, ii. 430

  Babb of Tingraze, Devon, iv. 95
  Babylon, iii. 434
  Babylonish captivity, iii. 69
  Bacchus and Sergius, Saints, Abbey at Angiers, iv. 99, 105. Their
    history 100
  Bacon, Lord Chancellor, i. 340. His History of Henry VII. 87
  ―――― Sir Nicholas, Lord Chancellor, married a daughter of Sir
    Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Badcock, Henry, iii. 86 _bis_. Rev. Henry 117. Margery and Mrs. 86
  Badgall village, ii. 377
  Bagg, James, iii. 358
  Bagge, Fisart, a sea captain, ii. 36. Sir James, of Plymouth 13
  Bagwell, i. 209, 407
  Baines, Mr. ii. 124.――Captain, iii. 91
  Bake, ii. 76. Account of 67
  Baker, Nicholas, ii. 423.――The Chronicler, iii. 163, 182.――His
    Chronicle, ii. 60, 182, 342――iii. 144.――Family, iv. 109
  Baldue mine, account of, ii. 309
  Baldwin of Colquite, arms of, iii. 66
  ―――― Exceter, iv. 111
  Bale, i. 295――iii. 277――iv. 111, 145.――His writings on Britain, ii. 62
  Balfour, Sir William, iv. 188
  Baliol College, Oxford, i. 318 _bis_――ii. 147――iii. 97, 344
  Ballachise, iv. 146
  Balls, Mary, ii. 365. Mary, wife of Theodore Paleolagus 372.
    William, her father ib. William 365. No traces of the family
    remaining 372
  Baltic sea, iv. 21
  Bampfield, ii. 293
  Banbury, Richard, iii. 382
  ―――― borough, Mr. Praed, M.P. for, iii. 10
  Banda, in the East Indies, capture of, ii. 216
  Bandy, Rev. Daniel, of Warleggon, iv. 129
  Banfield, Mr. iii. 125
  Bangor, Stanbury, Bishop of, iii. 255
  ―――― monastery, i. 289
  Bankes, Anne, F. and Henry, iii. 220
  Bant, William, iii. 42
  Baptist, St. John, iii. 82
  Baragwaneth, John, iv. 55
  Barbadoes, iii. 183.――Colonel Kendall, governor of, iv. 23
  Barbiague, i. 153
  Bards, druidical, i. 192
  ―――― verses on Arthur’s sepulchre, i. 337
  Barham, Dr. iii. 11, 100
  Baring, Alexander, i. 151――ii. 314
  Barnet heath, anecdote of the battle of, ii. 182
  Barnewell, George, iii. 102
  Barnstaple, iv. 107
  Baron, family, Jasper, Mr. iii. 377
  Baron of Lestwithiel, Mr. iii. 24
  ―――― of Trelynike, Christopher, i. 379
  Baronius, i. 206, 214.――His agonal, iii. 434
  Barret family, John, ii. 89. Roger 192. Mr. and arms 89
  Barrett, Mr. ii. 89
  Barrow, an ancient, i. 187
  ―――― John, ii. 192
  Barrows, the five, iv. 32
  Barry, ii. 119 _bis_.
  Bartholomew hospital cased with Bath stone, i. 58
  Bartholomew, “De Propriet. Rerum,” i. 163
  ―――― St. his feast, ii. 220――iii. 324.――Act of Uniformity to be
    professed before, ii. 220. Two thousand clergy deprived of their
    benefices upon, in 1662, 307
  Bartine castle, i. 230
  Barton, etymology of, ii. 152, 153
  ―――― Charles, iii. 154
  Basil, Emperor, his menology, ii. 36
  ―――― St. his Sermon in praise of St. Julyot, ii. 274
  Basill, account of, i. 198. Etymology 199
  Basingstoke hundred, ii. 208
  ―――― manor, ii. 208
  Baskeville, i. 206
  Basset, i. 160, 266. Sir Francis 114.――Francis, ii. 413. Sir
    Francis, ordered to defend St. Michael’s mount, the mount granted
    to him 213. His cup, given to the corporation of St. Ives 259,
    271. Thomas, William 428.――Richard, iv. 28. Sir Thomas 187
  Basset of Pencoose, William, i. 391
  ―――― Trewhele, John, i. 391
  ―――― of Tyhiddy, Sir Francis, i. 163 _ter._ John 86. J. P.
    259.――Family, ii. 199, 234, 235, 238 _bis_, 239, 241, 242. Hon.
    Frances 250. Francis 98, 235, 242 _bis_, 243 _ter._ Sir Francis
    235 _ter._, 236, 243 _bis_, 245, 246, 247, 248 _ter._ Baron 249.
    George 239. John 188, 235 _ter._, 243. John P 239, 242, 244. Sir
    John 239. Lady 240. Lucy 243. William 235 _bis_. Mr. 236. Rev. Mr.
    234. Mrs. 242. Arms 239.――Francis, iii. 38 _ter._, 229, 381, 445.
    Francis, Lord De Dunstanville 239, 271. John 239. J. P. 380.
    Margaret 445. William 381. Lady 390. Miss 8. Mr. 133, 381 _bis_.
    Seized by Mr. Boscawen 217. Mrs. heir of the Pendarves family 303.
    Family 384, 390.――John, iv. 152, 154 _bis_. Family 154
  ―――― Umberleigh, i. 368.――Sir John, ii. 239
  ―――― signature to Magna Charta, ii. 242
  Bassett, ii. 176
  Bastard, i. 319. Sir William 319. Arms 320
  Baswedneck manor, iv. 166
  Bate, Sarah, i. 355
  Bath, i. 56――ii. 215, 295――iii. 123, 252
  ―――― Battle of Lansdowne, near, ii. 349
  ―――― John, Earl of, i. 104.――Earl of, governor of Pendennis castle,
    ii. 14. John, Earl of 6. Bought St. Mawe’s castle 277. Sir John
    Grenville, created Earl of 345. John Grenville, Earl of 339, 340.
    His iniquitous proceedings to recover property sold by his father
    333. Earls of 340
  ―――― three brothers named, iv. 3
  ―――― oolite, a house at Truro, built of, ii. 33
  ―――― and Wells, Thomas Ken, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  ―――― stone transported to Truro and London, and St. Bartholomew
    hospital cased with, i. 58
  Bathsheba, i. 329
  Bathurst, Allen and Jane, iii. 249
  Batten, John, character of, and of Rev. J. H. iii. 95. Family 94 and 95
  Battin, account of, ii. 227
  ―――― of Battin family, Miss, ii. 227
  Battle Abbey Roll, iii. 142
  ―――― deanery of, i. 147
  Bauden, i. 247, 397
  ―――― of Gudden, Reginald, strange story of, ii. 300
  Baudree, i. 243
  ―――― Rev. Mr. iii. 182
  Bavi, in Italy, iv. 172
  Bawden, i. 8――ii. 316
  ―――― of Looe, Mr. iv. 32
  Bawdry, Rev. Daniel, of Quethiock and Worlegan, iii. 372
  Baxter, etymology of, iv. 8 _quin._
  Bay of Biscay, ii. 246
  Bayley, Rev. J. vicar of St. Mervyn, iii. 179
  Bayliff family, ii. 259, 260
  ―――― of Blackmore, iii. 213
  Bayton parish, iii. 118
  Beachey head, iii. 10. High water at 98
  Beacon, a Danish intrenchment, ii. 56
  ―――― etymology and purpose of, iii. 394
  Beale, Matthew, i. 2――iv. 44
  ―――― of St. Teath, i. 2
  Bealtine, in Cornwall, fires on May day, in honour of the sun, iv. 8
  Bear, i. 224
  ―――― Grace, William, ii. 396
  Beare, Mr. ii. 261.――Thomas, iv. 22. William 22 _bis_. Miss, Mr. and
    arms 22
  ―――― of Killigarth, iv. 161
  ―――― Trenarall, George, and his arms, i. 405
  Bearford, ii. 256
  Beauchamp family, ii. 130 _quat._ Guy 130. John 123, 133. Joseph
    133. Stephen 130. William 130 _bis_. Arms 130.――Lord, and his
    nephew, iv. 186
  ―――― monument at Gwennap, ii. 135
  ―――― of Bletsho, ii. 130
  ―――― of Chyton, Luke and Peter, iii. 315
  ―――― of Hatch, ii. 130
  ―――― Earl of Warwick, arms, ii. 130
  ―――― of Trevince, Peter, iii. 303
  Beauford, John, i. 216
  ―――― of Lantegles, i. 105
  ―――― James, i. 222
  ―――― John, Duke of Somerset, John his father, and Margaret, iii. 65
  Beaulieu or Bewley abbey, Hants, ii. 190, 191, 327. King John’s
    reasons for founding it, Latin 327. English 328. Afforded
    sanctuary to Queen Margaret and Perkin Warbeck 329
  Beaumont, ii. 119 _bis_. William 195. William Lord 185.――Mrs.
    Dorothy and her daughter, iii. 38
  Beauties of England and Wales, i. 183, 194――iii. 244
  Beavill of Guarnack or Killygarth, ii. 332 _bis_.
  Becagh, Thomas, iv. 146
  Becanus, Goropius, i. 192
  Becher, the introducer of reverberatory furnaces, iii. 343
  Becker, i. 366
  Becket, St. Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, iii. 177.――His day
    177, 179. His death 177. His church in St. Mervyn 177. One of his
    murderers 246
  ―――― of Curturtholl, iii. 170 _bis_. Arms 170
  Bedack or Bessake manor, account of, ii. 353, 354 _bis_.
  Beddoes, Dr. iii. 94. His life, chemical experiments, and character 251
  Bede, the Venerable, iii. 167, 364――iv. 42, 43.――Has preserved a
    letter of Pope Gregory in his Ecclesiastical History, ii. 288
  Bedeverus, i. 335
  Bedford, i. 294――ii. 76
  ―――― Earl of, i. 65. Francis Russell, Earl of 65. Duke of 26
  ―――― Daniel, ii. 160.――Rev. Mr. 276. Miss, iii. 196.――Rev. John of
    St. Wenn, iv. 137, 140
  Bedfordshire, i. 369――Chalk hills in, iii. 10. The Cornwalls 22
    times sheriffs of 449
  Bedingfield, Sir Robert, iii. 140
  Bedoke or Besake in Lasake, iii. 359
  Beel arms, ii. 252
  Beer, Mr. ii. 259
  Beere, Mr. iii. 65
  Bees, St. in Cumberland, iii. 158
  Beiltine in Ireland, _see Bealtine_
  Belfour, i. 113
  Belimaur, father of Cassibelan, i. 10
  Bell rock, near the Forth, lighthouse upon, iii. 378
  Belloprato, Rodolphus de, ii. 107
  Bellot 301, 302. Anne, Christopher 349. Francis 356. Renatus 302,
    303. Arms 302.――Rev. Mr. of Maddern, iii. 78. Family 423
  ―――― of Bochim, i. 357. Of Bochym 356――ii. 227
  Bells, ceremony of christening, iii. 210
  Benalleck chapel, i. 242
  Benedict’s, St. monks, i. 73
  Benedictine abbey, ii. 81
  ―――― monastery, i. 341
  ―――― monks, iv. 25.――Priory of, on St. Michael’s mount, ii. 174,
    176.――Walter de Exeter said to be one, iv. 111
  ―――― nuns, i. 73, 176.――Monastery of, in France, iii. 141
  ―――― rule, iv. 100
  Benedictines, priory of, at West Conworthy, iii. 103
  Benedictus Abbas, i. 96
  Benett’s, barton, iv. 152, 154
  ―――― St. in Lanyvet, iii. 111
  Bengal, iii. 188
  Benham, Lord, i. 124
  Beni, i. 77
  Benin, bight of, iv. 90
  Bennet, Rev. Joseph, ii. 338. His father 339. Richard 192.――R. G.
    iii. 274.――Adam and Anne, iv. 75. Rev. John 40
  ―――― of Renton, Devon, John, iv. 75 _ter._
  ―――― of Hexworthy, Edward, iii. 2 _bis_, 3; Honor and Richard 3.
    Family 2. Arms 3
  ―――― St. Monastery in Lanivet, ii. 338 _bis_. Interesting remains,
    history involved in obscurity, attached to Bodmin priory 386. Made
    defence in civil war, modern vicissitudes 387.――Pider, an alien
    priory, iv. 101
  Bennett, i. 276――ii. 212
  ―――― George, ii. 377
  Benthamia passifera, iv. 181
  Bere, George, i. 406
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 406
  ―――― Alston, Devon, ii. 118
  Berengarius of Angiers, i. 110, 111
  Bergh in Flanders, iii. 33
  ―――― St. Winnox or Winoe, iv. 157
  Beriman, George, iv. 55
  Berimus, St., Bishop of Dorchester, ii. 60
  Berkeley, James Lord, i. 313.――Charles, Viscount Falmouth, ii. 11.
    Lord Berkeley of Stratton 23, 117. Sophia, his daughter 23, 117.
    Viscount Falmouth’s arms 11. Barbara, iii. 201. Thomas, Lord 163.
    William, Lord B. of Stratton 201. Judge 144. Family 90.――Sir John,
    iv. 14 _quat._ Lord Berkeley of Stratton, and arms 14. Family, ii.
    192――iv. 139
  Berkley, of Bruton, Somersetshire, Sir Maurice, iv. 14
  Berkshire, ii. 139
  Bernard, i. 410
  ―――― St. ii. 225
  Bernard of Bodmin, Benedict and John, iii. 324
  Bernevas, iv. 160
  Berriman, Henry, i. 273, 276
  Berry, John, ii. 196
  ―――― court, Barton, account of, ii. 232
  ―――― park, iv. 31 _bis_, 32
  Berrycomb, i. 93
  Berryhill, i. 93
  Bertin, St. Abbot of Sithian, iv. 157
  Berwick, ii. 76
  ―――― John de, iii. 2
  Berwoldus, Bishop of Cornwall, ii. 60
  Bespalfan chapel, i. 225
  Best, i. 391
  ―――― of St. Wenn, Edward, his booty at Penzance, iii. 82
  Betenson, family and arms, iii. 23
  Betham, Sir William, iv. 144
  Bethsaida, St. Andrew born at, iv. 100
  Bettesworth, John, LL.D. and John, iii. 205
  ―――― of Clithurst, Thomas, iii. 206
  ―――― of Fyning, in Rogate parish, Sussex, Thomas, iii. 205. Family
    206. Nine descents 205
  Bettison, Richard, iii. 358
  Beverley, i. 141
  Bevill, John, i. 406. Sir Richard 16. John 17. Descent of the family
    16. Arms 17.――Elizabeth, iv. 22, 162. John 22. Peter, Philip, and
    Sir William 22, 162. Arms 22, 72
  ―――― of Gwarnack family, iv. 22, 162
  ―――― family, monument to one of them, iv. 36
  ―――― of Killigarth, in Talland, ii. 343
  Bewes of Carnedon, Thomas, iii. 459
  Beyworthye, ii. 430
  Bicketon, account of, i. 410
  Bickford, i. 223, 349
  ―――― of Deansland, Devon, Arscott, iv. 130
  Bickton, account of, i. 412
  ―――― of Bickton, arms, i. 412
  Biddulph, Sir Theophilus, of Westcombe, Kent, iii. 162
  Bideford, ii. 221
  ―――― bridge, erection of, ii. 341
  Bigberry of Bigberry, Sir William, i. 346
  Bignonia grandiflora, iv. 181
  Bikesleya, Osbert, ii. 427
  Billett, ii. 212
  ―――― Rev. Mr. iii. 171
  Billing of Hengar, family and heir of, iv. 94, 95. Gentlemen of
    blood and arms, their marriages and arms, Tredinick gave the same,
    iv. 95
  Billinge, Sir Richard, iii. 140. Richard 141, 150
  Bilson, iii. 206
  Bindon or Bindown hill, iii. 250, 253――iv. 32
  Binerton, ii. 260
  Binks, Philip, ii. 189
  Binmerton, chapel at, i. 288
  Binony manor, iv. 16 _bis_.
  Biny, i. 329
  Birch of Pembrokeshire, Sir Robert, and his daughter, iii. 326
  Bird, Mr. monument to, and Mr. of Devon, iii. 426
  Birge, Berty, i. 149
  Birkhead, Mr. i. 8
  Birne, Patrick, iv. 146
  Birthdays, celebration of, ii. 228
  Bishop, Rev. Mr. i. 224. Family 213.――Rev. Mr. ii. 130.――Mr.
    memoir of, iii. 143
  Bishop’s book, iii. 380
  ―――― jurisdiction, Temple parish lies out of, iv. 149
  ―――― Tawter, iii. 415
  Bishops, committal of seven to the Tower, iii. 297, 298. Feelings
    excited by it 298. List of their names 299. Song on the subject 298
  Blacaler, John, ii. 195
  Black, Ensign, i. 267, 275
  ―――― Book of the Archbishops of Dublin, iv. 146
  ―――― canons, i. 73 _ter._
  ―――― friars mendicant, i. 83
  ―――― Haye, iv. 161
  Black jack, ii. 310
  ―――― monks, iii. 232
  ―――― prince, ii. 155, 176――iii. 239
  ―――― rock, ii. 1, 2
  ―――― island, iv. 72, 230
  Blackburn, i. 153
  Blackheath, Kent, iii. 388.――Rebel camp at, i. 87
  Blackston, i. 109. Of London 204
  Blake family, ii. 362. General 26. His defeat of Van Tromp and De
    Witt, and his own defeat by Van Tromp 25. Entertained by Captain
    Penrose, illiterate 26. His origin 27
  Blake of Ford castle, Northumberland, Anne, and Sir Francis, iii.
    200, 201
  Blakiston, Sir M. Bart., iii. 138
  Blanchard manor, ii. 304. Account of by Hals 300. By Tonkin 302.
    Tin-mines in 302
  Blandinberg, ii. 127
  Blase, St. by Leland, iv. 275
  ―――― St. church, iii. 372 _bis_.
  Blatchford, Mr. iii. 14
  Blathwayte, i. 221. William 221
  Blayble farm, ii. 256
  Blaze, St. i. 41
  ―――― History of, by Hals, i. 52. By the Editor, Patron of cloth
    manufacture 55, and of Ragusa 55. His feast 53
  Blazey, St. bay, iv. 124
  ―――― bridge, i. 60――iii. 57, 59
  ―――― highway, i. 56
  ―――― parish, i. 41, 152――ii. 314, 393, 398――iii. 55, 58 ――iv. 99
  BLAZEY, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, saint’s history, i.
    52. Fair, Rosilian, principal inhabitants 53. By Tonkin, Roselian,
    Trenawick, Trengreene 54. By the Editor, saint’s history,
    broadcloth manufacture 55. Birthplace of Ralph Allen, Esq., his
    history 56. Statistics and Geology by Dr. Boase 59
  Blekennock town, iv. 229
  Blencowe, Mr. Justice, iii. 417
  Bletius, Prince of Wales and Cornwall, iii. 80
  Blewet of Colon, Miss, and arms, iv. 95, _see Bluet_
  ―――― of Cornwall, i. 210. Colon 210. Robert 210 _bis_. Arms 210
  ―――― of Hampshire, arms, i. 210
  Blewet of Holcomb Rogus, i. 210
  Blewett, George, iv. 214, 215 _bis_. John 215, 216. Mr. 216, 219.
    His large property 219. Family monuments 219
  Blewett of Marazion, George, ii. 83
  Bligh, John, i. 216. Family 78, 396.――Captain William, of the
    Bounty, iv. 45. Family 139
  ―――― of Botadon, i. 237
  ―――― of Botathon, William, ii. 304
  ―――― of Carnedon family, iii. 459
  Blissland, i. 103, 129, 167, 174――ii. 56, 151
  ―――― church, robbery of, i. 61
  ―――― manor, jurisdiction and possessors, i. 61
  ―――― parish (or Bliston) in Trigshire, iii. 125, 224――iv. 48, 49, 50
  BLISSLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 60.
    Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, ancient state,
    jurisdiction of manor, possessors, tin-mines 61. By Tonkin,
    etymology 61. By the Editor, statistics, two incumbents in 115
    years, Geology 62
  Blockhead, ii. 331
  Bloflemmen parish, iii. 463
  Blois of Penryn, John, Roger, and family, iii. 62
  Bloughan Pille, by Leland, iv. 277
  Blount, Elizabeth, i. 64
  Blount’s Tenures, i. 153――iii. 442――iv. 7
  Bloyse, Mr. ii. 97
  Bluet, Edward, i. 316
  ―――― of Little Colan, Colan, iii. 318. Elizabeth 319. Richard 318
    _bis_, 319
  Bluett, Mrs. i. 315.――Mr. ii. 375――Rev. T. L. of Mullion, iii. 258
  Bluisdale, St. Patrick born at, ii. 65
  Boaden, ii. 130
  Boar of Cornwall, i. 333
  Boase, Dr. ii. 340, 352.――Mr. iii. 95. Dr. H. S. secretary to the
    Geological Society 95, 100, 110 _bis_, 118. His Geology of
    Cornwall 371. Family 94
  Boats with paddle wheels, iv. 17
  Bocarne, i. 369. Etymology 85
  Bocconia cordata, iv. 181
  Bochym, i. 356. Account of 301, 303
  ―――― arms, ii. 131
  ―――― of Bochym, John, i. 301. Arms 302.――Robert, ii. 192
  ―――― in Cury, ii. 139
  Boconnoc, i. 112 _bis_, 113
  ―――― downs, i. 113, 114――iv. 186, 188
  ―――― parish, ii. 397――iii. 347――iv. 159, 184.――Living of, iii. 67, 451
  ―――― or Boconnock manor, iii. 437.――By Hals, possessors from Edward
    III., i. 63. By Tonkin, etymology 67. By the Editor, finest seat
    in Cornwall, and description 68. Governor Pitt’s purchase of 68
  BOCONNOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    antiquity as a manor, no endowed church 1294, patronage, land tax,
    i. 63. Statistics, poor rate, and Geology 72
  Bocunyan, ii. 151
  Bodanan tenement, iv. 43
  Bodcuike, iii. 449
  Boddenham, i. 91
  Bodecastle, iii. 233
  Bodenek, and trajectus, by Leland, iv. 279, 280, 290
  Bodenick, ii. 411. Account of 410
  Bodeworgy, i. 213
  Bodilly Vean, ii. 137
  ―――― Veor, ii. 137
  Bodleat castle, iv. 229
  Bodley, John, ii. 196
  Bodman or Bodmin bishopric, i. 73――ii. 95.――Bishop of, i. 231,
    250――ii. 299――iv. 116
  ―――― borough, i. 367, 368――iv. 46.――Boyer, mayor of, ii. 198. George
    Hunt, M.P. for 381.――William Peter, M.P. for, iii. 333. S. T.
    Spry, M.P. for, ii. 35――iii. 446
  ―――― Martin, Canon of, i. 97, 98
  ―――― church of St. Peter at, i. 74, 76. Steeple 75
  ―――― downs, ii. 187
  ―――― manor, iii. 238. With Keyland in Bodman and Lostwithiel
    parishes 359
  ―――― market, iii. 16
  ―――― parish, i. 133, 167, 174――ii. 60, 379, 384――iii. 58
  BODMIN parish, situation, boundaries, ancient name, etymology, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, school-house, secular
    church, now in ruins, i. 76. Bonehouse, British entrenchment 77.
    Court leet, Crown rent 78. Franciscan friary of St. Nicholas, to
    what uses converted 79. Its font, founder, his history 80.
    Miracles 82. History of the order 82. Lancar 83. Suicide of Mr.
    Mount Stephens 84. Bocarne 85. Flammock’s rebellion 86. Bodmin,
    the rendezvous of Perkin Warbeck’s forces, and of Arundell’s
    rebels 88. By Tonkin, etymology 91. By Whitaker, church, school
    91. Market, Grey Friars, bones found there 92. Chapels and
    almshouses of St. Anthony and St. George 93. Priory church, and
    Vivian’s tomb 94. By the Editor, church and monastery of St.
    Petroc 95. Histories by Whitaker and Wallis, story from Benedictus
    Abbas 96. Translated 98. By Wallis, benefice and patron,
    dimensions and history of church, destroyed by lightning,
    pinnacles dangerous, chapel of St. Thomas, tower at Berry, church
    and churchyard 100. Prior Vivian’s tomb, donation of organ. By the
    Editor, carving in the church 101. Painted window, statistics, and
    Geology 102
  ―――― priory of St. Peter or St. Petroc, i. 73, 116, 232――ii. 332,
    382, 386――iii. 24, 238, 277, 279――iv. 137, 162.――Dissolved its
    property and royalty, i. 74.――Documents relating to, Appendix XI.
    iv. 337.――House, i. 74
  ―――― Prior of, i. 74, 230, 231 _ter._, 246, 250, 289, 294, 371, 373,
    405――ii. 62, 151――iii. 175, 237, 279――iv. 137, 138, 160.――Roger, i.
    97, 98. List of priors 75.――Thomas Vivian, iii. 279
  ―――― races, ii. 35
  ―――― railroad to, from Wade bridge, i. 376
  ―――― road, ii. 390
  ―――― stone, iii. 21
  ―――― town, ii. 51, 151, 154 _bis_, 187, 188 _bis_, 192, 193 _bis_,
    195――iii. 26, 189, 278――iv. 187.――Erected into a coinage town,
    wholesale market, borough writs, principal inhabitants, precept
    for elections, i. 78. Importance, weekly market, fairs, number of
    churches 79. Decay 93. Record and council rooms, floor giving way
    100. Discovery of records 101.――Burnt by the Danes, ii. 60. County
    gaol built at 431. Two brothers left for London to seek their
    fortunes 34. John Robarts, Viscount of 379. Robert Robarts,
    Viscount of 379 _bis_. Esteemed by Charles II. 380.――A Bishop’s
    see, iii. 408. See transferred there 267. Bishop of 456. St.
    Petroc’s church in 277. Monastery at 278
  Bodmyn by Leland, iv. 261
  Bodregen of Trengreene, i. 55
  Bodrigan, Sir Henry, i. 417, 418, 421
  ―――― family, ii. 106, 114. Variances with the Haleps 109. Arms 107.
    Sir Henry 115, 317. His escape from Bosworth field, and wonderful
    leap, Sir Richard Edgecumbe’s escape from him 108. His history by
    the Editor, his property divided between Edgecumbe and Trevanian,
    attacked near his own house 115. His manor of Newton given to
    Trevanian 318. Isabel 398. Otho 107 _quat._ William 398. Arms of
    William 107.――Sir Henry, iii. 294. Mr. 393. Family 190, 203, 293.
    Struggle with the Edgecumbes for each other’s property, lost
    theirs at Bosworth 204.――Family, iv. 21, 71
  ―――― de, family, monument to, iii. 292
  ―――― of Restronget, Wm. de, and family, attainted, iii. 226
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 106, 114
  ―――― leap, ii. 108
  Bodrigge in Kellark, ii. 143
  Bodrigy, account of, ii. 343
  Bodrugan, Henry de, family, ii. 363.――Arms, iii. 119
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 274
  Bodrugons, ii. 100
  Bodville, Charles, Earl of Radnor, iv. 73
  Bodwanick village, ii. 355
  Body, Mr. ii. 192
  Boerhaave, iii. 49
  Boggan, Zacharias, Mayor of Totness, his arms, ii. 320
  Boggans, ii. 320
  Bohelland farm, story of a melancholy and dreadful murder at, ii. 100
  Bohemia, John of Luxemburg, King of, ii. 72
  Bohun, Humphrey de, Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Margaret, i. 63
  Bohurra manor, ii. 276――iii. 209
  Boia, i. 107
  Boii, i. 107
  Bojil village, ii. 81
  Bokelby in St. Kew, iii. 61
  Bokelly, account of, ii. 335
  Bokiddick village, ii. 385
  Bolerium, supposed to be Land’s End, ii. 21
  ―――― cove, iii. 259
  Boligh family, John, ii. 398. William 398
  Bolitho, Messrs. ii. 125.――Family, iv. 67
  Bollandists, iii. 33
  Bolleit, i. 141. Geoffrey de 142
  Bolton, Duke of, ii. 257, 363――iii. 46, 118. Henry the last Duke
    47.――His heirs, iv. 58
  Bolytho, Alexander, ii. 160
  Bombay, iii. 188
  Bonaventure, St. i. 81 _ter._, 82. His Hymns 82. His Life of St.
    Francis 81
  ―――― Thomasine, her history, name, birth, iv. 132. Went to London,
    married her master, a rich widow twice 133. Thirdly, her death,
    founded many works of piety and charity 134
  Bond, ii. 256――iii. 246 _bis_, 250 _ter._, 252,  293, 378――iv. 25,
    37, 38.――His History of Looe, iii. 378.――His Topographical
    Sketches, i. 178, 321――ii. 295 _ter._――iii. 45, 120, 121――iv.
    25.――Henry, i. 383
  ―――― of earth, ii. 101
  ―――― of Looe, Thomas, iii. 348
  Bone, Richard, ii. 353 _bis_, 354. Arms 353.――Family, iv. 161 _bis_.
  Bonealvy, ii. 430
  Boniface, his life, iv. 126. The name 127
  ―――― Pope, ii. 288
  Bonifant, John, ii. 189
  Bonithan of Kertleowe, Alice, iv. 107
  Bonithon of Bonithon, Jane, iii. 225, 228. Her character 225.
    Richard 225, and Richard 225 _bis_. Simon 225 _bis_. Family arms
    226 _bis_. Monument at Milor 228
  ―――― James, of Grampound, iii. 229
  Bonvill, ii. 71, 292
  ―――― of Killygarth, ii. 341
  Bonville, Sir William, Lord Bonville, iii. 294, 295, 350 _ter._
    Taken at the battle of St. Alban’s and beheaded 294. Sir William
    his son, and William his grandson, Lord Harrington, both killed at
    the battle of Wakefield 294.――Family, iv. 107
  Bonython, account of, i. 302. Etymology 303
  ―――― family, i. 125.――Charles, ii. 120. Family took the name of
    Carclew 337.――Miss, iv. 101
  ―――― of Bonython, i. 302. Charles, M.P. 302 _bis_. His suicide 303.
    John 302. John, Dr. John 303. Richard, his suicide, Roskymer 303.
    Thomas, arms 302
  ―――― of Carclew, i. 143, 302
  ―――― John, Richard, and the heiress, iii. 303
  Booth, John, Bishop of Exon, i. 218.――Henry, ii. 196
  Bordeny abbey, i. 200
  Borel, i. 192
  Borew, account of, i. 420
  Borlase, i. 16, 141 _bis_, 198, 398 _quater_.
  ―――― Dr. historian of Cornwall, i. 180, 184, 228 _bis_, 229 _quat._,
    341, 360 _bis_――iii. 84, 89, 137, 196, 244, 309 _bis_, 323, 324,
    329 _bis_, 340, 366 _bis_――iv. 29, 30, 31, 175. Rev. William,
    LL.D. ii. 218, 219, 285, 361. Vicar of St. Just 386
    _ter._――Biographical notices of, iii. 51.――His Antiquities, ii.
    285, 424――iii. 31, 80, 89, 244, 365, 386. His Collections 373. His
    diploma 50. His speculations on the Druids 31. His estimation
    among his countrymen 408. His MSS. 232. His Natural History of
    Cornwall 329, 366, 386. Pope’s letter to him 53. His works 49, 52.
    Their effects 49. His death 54. His sons 53, 54. His son 196.――His
    account of a Celtic superstition, ii. 206, and of St. Kebius
    338.――His Map, iv. 24. His Natural History 30
  ―――― Humphrey, i. 398. John 59. Nicholas 398. James 18. Arms
    18.――Ann, ii. 218 _bis_. Rev. Geo. 219. J. B. 218. Rev. Walter
    218. LL.D. 302. Vice-warden of the Stannaries 285. Rev. Mr. 299.
    Family 282, 285, 286.――Humphrey, iii. 317. Nicholas 358. Samuel
    88, 90. Dr. Walter 54. Vicar of Madden 82. His biography 84. Built
    the house at Castle Hornech 84. Dr. William, Rector of Ludgvan 49.
    Family 83, 88, 90, 94. Arms 84.――Family, iv. 141
  Borlase of Borlase in St. Wenn, ii. 282
  ―――― of Newland, ii. 282
  ―――― of Pendene, John, ii. 282. John, M. P. 285. Arms 282. Of
    Pendeen in St. Just, John father of the two doctors, iii. 84, 88
  ―――― of Sythney, ii. 282
  ―――― of Treludderin, Nicholas, i. 199
  ―――― of Treludra, i. 20, 397 _bis_.
  ―――― of Treludrow, Humphrey, iii. 238, 268. Memoir of 268. Family
    property 271 _bis_.
  ―――― manor, iv. 140
  ―――― Pippin, iii. 268――iv. 141
  ―――― Varth manor, iv. 139
  Borough system, i. 389
  Borthy, i. 386 _bis_. Ralph de 386
  Bosawsen, iii. 322
  Boscastel, by Leland, iv. 257
  Boscastle, iii. 234
  ―――― harbour, ii. 50
  Boscawen, Admiral, i. 148. Edward 384. Hugh 58. Hugh, Hugh 297. Hugh
    Viscount Falmouth 141. Right Honourable Hugh 294. John de,
    Lawrence 140. Nicholas 113. William 297. Arms 140. Family 145,
    386. Admiral, ii. 285. Bridget 68. Hugh 68. Hugh kept a school 32.
    Hugh created Viscount Falmouth 11. Right Hon. Hugh 277. P. C. to
    William, III. 54. Family 136, 255, 303, 304, 357.――Hugh, iv. 77.
    Colonel Nicholas 188. Family 1 _bis_
  ―――― of Boscawen Rose, i. 254. Lawrence 254.――St. Burian, fam. iii.
    213. Their marriages 213, 216
  ―――― of Nansavallen, Charles, ii. 299. Charles, M.P. 303
  ―――― of Tregothnan, Bridget, Hugh, i. 205. Hugh 249. Hugh 384. Hugh
    395, 396. Hugh, ii. 137. Right Hon. Hugh 299, 302, 303 _bis_. John
    302. Nicholas 304.――Bridget and her great dowry, iii. 216. Admiral
    Edward, memoir of 218. Elected for Cornwall 219. Edward, his death
    219. Edward Earl of Falmouth 220. Has rebuilt the house at
    Tregothnan 221. Lord Boscawen Rose took the first class degree at
    Oxford 221. G. E. third Viscount 220. Hugh 209, 212, 213 _ter._,
    214, 215, 236, 397, 464 _bis_. Hugh 216. Supported Wm. III. 216.
    Arrested James’s adherents 217. Raised to the peerage 217. V.
    Falmouth 397. Hugh, second Viscount, and his character 217.
    Nicholas 213. Colonel Nicholas, in the rebel army 183. Richard
    213. W. G., his death 219. Dr. Walcot’s verses on 220. Family 61,
    208, 258, 305, 419. Antiquity 215, name 215, obtained Tregothnan
    215. Benefactors of their neighbourhood, their part in the Civil
    War and in the Revolution 216. Family 305, 419
  ―――― of Trevellick, i. 254
  ―――― downs, i. 141
  ―――― Ros, i. 140. Etymology and possessors 145.――Rose, in St.
    Burian, iii. 215
  ―――― Rose, Lord, son of the Earl of Falmouth, iii. 221
  ―――― Un, i. 141 _bis_
  Bosence, account of, i. 360
  Bosinney borough, iv. 20
  Bosistow, account of, iii. 35
  ―――― Mr. of Treadreath, family and arms, iii. 35
  Bosithney, i. 323 _ter._
  Boskednan, i. 141
  Boskenna, i. 148 _bis_
  Boskenso manor, iii. 77
  Bosquet’s Book, i. 214
  Bossiney, account of, i. 340.――Or Bosinny by Leland, iv. 258
  ―――― cove, i. 343
  ―――― manor exchanged for Wining Winington, ii. 128
  Bostock, Edward, iv. 26
  Boston, America, iii. 72 _bis_. The people ungrateful to Mr. Peters 73
  Bostowda, ii. 330
  Bosvigo, ii. 318
  Boswallow, account of, i. 392
  Boswaydel, etymology, ii. 353
  Boswellick, i. 19
  Bosworgy, account of, i. 224
  Bosworth field, ii. 108 _bis_, 115 _bis_――iii. 206
  Boswortha, i. 29
  Botallack mine, and garnets at, ii. 291
  Botallock, account of, mines valuable, ii. 285. Produce copper below
    the tin 286
  Botelett manor, ii. 397
  Botolph’s, St. passage, iv. 185
  Botowne, iv. 111
  Botreaux, iv. 48
  ―――― castle, iii. 39, 234, 235 _bis_.――iv. 228.――Port of, iii. 235, 236
  ―――― William de, i. 340. Family 368.――Lord and family, ii.
    397.――William de, iii. 232. William 353.――Lord, iv. 138. His heir
    138, 139
  ―――― of Botreaux, William Lord B. and his daughter, iii. 234. Family 234
  ―――― of Penheale, i. 378. Richard, William 378
  ―――― honor of, iii. 234, 235
  Botusfleming parish, i. 162――ii. 361, 363, 364
  BOTUSFLEMING, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 103.
    Ancient state, value of benefice, land tax, Muttenham, i. 104.
    Father Peter’s rhymes, etymology by Tonkin, by Editor, singular
    occurrence 105. Statistics, rector, Geology 106
  Bouchier, Foulk, of Tavistock Lord Fitzwarren, i. 170. Lady Frances
    411. Henry, sixth Earl of Bath 411. Rev. Henry, and his daughter
    396. Richard, fifth Earl of Bath 411.――Jane and Captain Richard,
    iii. 187
  Bourdeaux, Joseph of Exeter, Archbishop of, i. 325
  Bouvardia tryphilla, iv. 181
  Bowden family, Reginald and arms, ii. 303
  ―――― of Trelisick, John, i. 399
  ―――― marks, i. 11
  Bower, Rev. J. of Lostwithiel, iii. 29
  Bowles, P. P. iii. 279
  Boy Bishop, monument of, in Salisbury Cathedral, ii. 313
  Boyeer, i. 88
  Boyer, Mayor of Bodmin, ii. 198
  Boyle, Edmund Earl of Cork, ii. 385. Family 354. Their share of the
    Courtenay property 385
  Boyle’s Biographical Dictionary, iv. 87
  Boyton, Robert de, ii. 412
  ―――― parish, ii. 234, 417, 429 _bis_――iv. 39, 40, 42, 61, 153
  BOYTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, land tax, etymology, Bradridge, i. 107. Northcott, history
    of Agnes Prest 108. Mount Calvary, a Cornish poem 109. Doctrine of
    transubstantiation, etymology by Tonkin 110. By the Editor, place of
    Agnes Prest’s martyrdom, statistics, vicar, Geology 111
  Brabyn family, i. 223, 225.――Mr. executed, iii. 184
  Braciano, Duke of, ii. 371
  Braddock or Bradock parish, iii. 59, 347. Living of 451.――Rectory,
    i. 72
  Braddon, Henry, and Captain William, ii. 87. Mrs. 338. Family,
    account, of 87.――Mr. iii. 252.――Lieut. Colonel, iv. 188
  ―――― of Treglith, William, iv. 62. Mr. 62
  Brades, Barton of, ii. 153
  Bradford, ii. 429
  ―――― Rev. Mr. i. 292. Family 289
  Bradley, Dr. life of, ii. 376
  Bradoak or Bradock downs, i. 113, 114――iv. 185, 186 _bis_, 188
  ―――― parish, i. 167――iv. 129, 155
  BRADOCK St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value
    of benefice, endowment, land tax, i. 112. By Tonkin, patron,
    incumbent, manor 112. By the Editor, living consolidated, residence
    removed, patron 112. Bradock down, the scene of a royal victory in
    1623, and of Lord Essex’s escape in 1644, 113. Exasperation of the
    royalists, expulsion of rebels from Cornwall, King’s farewell to the
    sheriff 114. Statistics, and Geology 115
  Bradridge, i. 107
  Bradryche, ii. 429
  Brady, Dr. iii. 27――iv. 81.――His Treatise on Boroughs, ii. 200――iv.
    81 _bis_, 83, 84 _bis_
  Braghan or Brechanus, St. King of Wales, built the town of
    Brecknock, was father of St. Keyne, St. Canock, and St. Cadock,
    ii. 292. Had 24 daughters and 2 sons, all Saints 294
  Bralton Clovelly, living, iii. 67
  Bramer, Elizabeth W. and John, iii. 86
  Bramford, Earl of, a Royal Commissioner, iv. 189
  Branell or Brannell manor, ii. 100, 109 _bis_――iii. 195, 448 _ter._,
    451. Etymology 452. Extent 451
  Brannel forest, iii. 451, 452
  Brannell’s, Lady, tomb, ii. 114
  Branscomb, Walter, Bishop of Exeter, _see Brounscomb_
  Branston, Judge, iii. 144
  Bray, account of, iii. 250
  Bray, Reginald, i. 87.――Francis de, ii. 118. Lord 282, 311. Mary
    118. Ralph, Sheriff of Hants 310. Family 282, 284 _bis_
  ―――― of Bray in France, ii. 311
  ―――― of Bray in St. Just, ii. 310, 311
  ―――― of Cornwall, family, ii. 237
  ―――― of Killington, Sir Edward, ii. 310. Sir Reginald, arms 311
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 282
  ―――― in Morvall, ii. 283
  Braydon, Captain, iii. 184
  Braye, de, family, i. 163 _bis_
  Brazen-nose College, Oxford, ii. 33
  Brazilwood, iii. 186
  Breaca, St. Life of, iv. 263
  Breadfruit tree, the Bounty went out to fetch plants of, iv. 45
  Breage, St. i. 263――ii. 353――iii. 431
  ―――― St. Church, iii. 285, 444
  ―――― St. parish, i. 115, 310, 344, 355――ii. 80――iii. 442.――Register,
    ii. 81. People of 82. Great Work mine at 83. Geology of, similar
    to Germow 85
  ―――― stone, i. 128
  Breath’s cattle, iv. 35
  Breca, St. iii. 342
  Brechan, St. painting of in St. Neot’s Church, ii. 298
  Brecknock, derivation of its name, i. 2. Built by King Braghan, ii. 292
  Breda, iii. 454. Lord Hollis, ambassador at 148
  Brend, George, iii. 387
  Brendon, William, iii. 163
  Brentford, Middlesex, i. 68――iii. 144
  Brenton, Henry, i. 24
  Breock, St. his history, i. 115
  ―――― church, i. 74――iii. 177
  Breock, St. parish, i. 301, 372, 373, 377, 406――ii. 80, 89, 253
    _bis_, 256, 257――iii. 334――iv. 137, 140, 160
  BREOCK, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    saint’s history, value of benefice, i. 115. Ancient state, Pelton
    manor, Hurston, Tredinick 116. Trevordei, by Tonkin, Etymology of
    Dunveth, by the Editor, statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 117
  BREOCK, St. in Kerrier parish, or Breage, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, daughter churches, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, ancient state, i. 118. Pengelly, Godolphin
    119. Carew and Sammes on its etymology 120. Pengarwick 124. By
    Tonkin, a Cornish distich 124. King Germoe’s throne 125. By the
    Editor, Earl of Godolphin, stanza upon his pedigree 126. Parish
    covered with mines, Whele Vor Mine, first steam engine in
    Cornwall, Pengelly, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 128
  Brereton, Mr. Trelawney, i. 358
  Brest, ii. 127
  ―――― haven, ii. 171. A formidable combined fleet harbours in 247
  Bretagne, iv. 145
  Breton, Cape, iii. 218
  ―――― millers more hardy than Cornish, ii. 24
  Bretons, iii. 336
  Brett, captain, iv. 188. Charged the parliament army under Skippon,
    knighted on the field 188
  Brewar, or Brewer, William, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 75――iii. 182
  ―――― St. Breward, or Brewer parish, i. 62, 103, 174 _bis_, 254――iii.
    222, 223, 224――iv. 48, 49, 93, 95 Breward, St. or Simon Ward
    district, iv. 97. Porphyritic rocks in 99
  BREWARD, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, land-tax, founder of church, i. 129. His
    history, benefactions, impropriation of this benefice 130. By
    Tonkin, name of Simon-Ward 130. By the Editor, Lank Major, Lank
    Minor, Swallock, Hamethy, Roughtor, and Brown Willy 131.
    Statistics, vicar, patrons, Geology by Dr. Boase, sterility,
    loneliness of church, west fertile 132
  Brewer, i. 1, 60. William, Lord Brewer 129. William, Bishop of
    Exeter 129, 130 _bis_
  Bricot, i. 331 _bis_, 332
  Briddon, Lieut.-col. i. 113
  Bridge place, ii. 2
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 80
  ―――― end meadow, iv. 31
  Bridgerule church, i. 133
  ―――― parish, ii. 413, 430――iii. 114――iv. 152 _bis_
  BRIDGERULE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, church in Devon,
    value of benefice, ancient state, by Tonkin, etymology, i. 133.
    Tackbere 134. By Editor, Tacabre, pedigree of Gilbert 134.
    Statistics, vicar 135
  Bridges, ii. 292
  Bridget, St. chapel at Landew, iii. 42
  Bridgewater, ii. 76. St. James’s hospital at, properly St. John’s
    412――iv. 254 _bis_
  Bridgman, Edward, ii. 196.――Sir Orlando, iii. 159
  Brigantes, i. 256
  Brightley, chapel at, ii. 348
  Brinn in Cornwall, ii. 348
  Brismar, ii. 208
  Bristol, i. 113, 373――ii. 76 _bis_――iii. 76, 89, 129.――Jonathan,
    Bishop of, i. 84.――St. James’s priory at, ii. 147.――Battle before,
    iii. 200, 204. Sir Jonathan Trelawney, Bishop of 296, 297 _ter._
    298 _quint._ One of the seven 296, 299. John Lake, Bishop of 296.
    Sir R. R. Vvyyan, M. P. for 137.――Henry Combe, mayor of, iv. 90.
    Mr. Coster, M. P. for 89
  ―――― channel, i. 381, 384――iii. 240
  ―――― waters, iii. 94
  ―――― John de, iii. 354
  ―――― frigate, iii. 186.――Commanded by Captain Penrose, ii. 25
  Britain, i. 335, 336 _bis_――ii. 1, 66, 75――iv. 116.――Churches of, i.
    294.――St. German travelled through, ii. 65. Various places
    dedicated to him in 75. Pelagians of 73. Pelagius, an inhabitant
    of 63.――Its Celtic inhabitants, iii. 49. St. Sennan came to 434
  ―――― Edmund of Hadham, Earl of, iii. 65
  Britany, i. 115――ii. 90, 123, 127――iii. 102, 281,
    285.――Pronunciation in, ii. 128
  ―――― Alan, Earl of, ii. 147
  British barrows, iii. 319
  ―――― camp, i. 369――iii. 111, 319
  ―――― channel, i. 26, 38, 41, 52, 135, 388――ii. 26, 36, 39, 50, 59,
    105, 106, 126, 171, 250, 319, 378――iii. 11, 102, 118, 129, 190,
    240, 257, 283, 421, 423, 429, 430, 436, 441, 442――iv. 19, 21, 23, 99
  ―――― Critic, iii. 407
  ―――― intrenchments, iv. 53, 94, 140
  ―――― minerals, greatest number of specimens from St. Just parish,
    ii. 291
  ―――― monarch, ii. 66
  ―――― Museum, i. 283, 300――iii. 154, 233, 408――iv. 33
  ―――― music, remnant of, ii. 166
  ―――― ocean, ii. 1 _bis_, 174, 237, 283――iii. 74 _bis_, 128, 198
  ―――― ornaments found, iii. 290
  ―――― tongue, iii. 114
  Britnall, John, ii. 196
  Brito, a poet, his lines on Arundell, iii. 149
  Britons, i. 295, 334――ii. 206, 261. Ancient, iii. 52, 365――iv. 168.
    their manner of writing. Religious ceremonies, and notion of the
    Deity, i. 193.――Believed in the appearance of St. Michael on their
    shore, ii. 172. Geruncius, King of 50.――Their names, iii. 130.
    Cadwallo, King of 284.――Inhabited one side of the Tamar, iv. 40
  Britton’s Beauties of England and Wales, i. 183, 194――iii. 244
  Britwyn, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Broadgate hall, Oxford, now Pembroke college, iii. 233
  Broadoak parish, iii. 348――iv. 159
  BROADOAK parish, additional sheet, by Hals, App. 4. Communicated by
    Mr. Polwhele; and supposed to be separated from the work in the
    bookseller’s hands. Situation, boundaries, etymology, iv. 184.
    Value of benefice, incumbent, and land-tax, Essex’s march to raise
    the siege of Plymouth, Sir Richard Grenville removes, Essex
    follows him, and encamps on Bradock downs, King Charles marches to
    Grenville’s assistance 185, and also encamps there, his overtures
    for peace, rejected by Essex, skirmishes, remarkable challenge
    186, and combat, related to Hals by several eye-witnesses, Essex
    obliged to retire 187. A battle 188. Treaty 189
  Brockland advowson in Kent, iii. 115
  Bromley of Lefeock, iii. 188
  Brook, Sir John, i. 87.――York herald, ii. 155
  Brook’s catalogue of Earls of Devon iii. 436
  Brounscomb, Walter, Bishop of Exeter, i. 209.――Founded a college,
    ii. 96. His death 97. Admonished in sleep to build Glasney college 341
  Brown, Anne and Rev. James, iii. 301. Dr. William, of Tavistock
    184.――James, iv. 4
  ―――― Walley, i. 201
  ―――― Willey, i. 131, 132, 188, 310――iii. 44
  Browne, George, of Bodmin, iii. 353, 459. G. F. C. 459. M. A. Lord
    Montague 231. William 153.――George of Bodmin, iv. 41
  Bruce, Edward, of Edinburgh, and his daughter, iv. 74
  Bruges in Flanders, iv. 14
  Brugmansia suaveolens, iv. 181
  Brune, Rev. C. Prideaux, i. 17――iii. 279
  Brunion, iii. 7
  Brutton, Elizabeth, i. 403
  Bryant of Bushill, John, and family, iii. 351
  Bryher island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  Bryn, iv. 161, 162.――Barton of, ii. 94, 332, 335
  Buck, L. W. ii. 416
  Buckhurst, Lord, ii. 9
  Buckingham, George Villiers, Duke of, ii. 382.――Duke of, iii. 183
  ―――― of Probus family, iv. 161
  ―――― palace, iii. 205
  Buckinghamshire, i. 353.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10. Mr. Praed, M. P.
    for 11
  ―――― Earl of, ii. 265, 268, 270――iii. 406
  Bucknam, John, ii. 189
  Buckwell, Miss, of Tyringham, iii. 10
  Buclawranbucke, ii. 429
  Bucton, Thomas de, iii. 354
  Bude bay, iii. 349――iv. 12, 13
  ―――― village, iv. 17. A watering place 18
  Budeox, i. 348
  Budeoxhed of Budeoxhed, Agnes, i. 348. Elizabeth 348. Philip, Thomas
    348. Thomas 347. Winifred 348. Arms 348
  Budeoxhed church, i. 348
  Buderkvam, i. 242
  Budge, ii. 54
  Budock church, ii. 3
  ―――― parish, i. 236――ii. 1 _bis_, 2, 3, 92 _bis_, 94, 96――iii. 74,
    77.――Rev. G. Allen, vicar of, iv. 95
  BUDOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, i. 135. Killigrew
    monuments, Arwinick, Rosmeran, Trescobays, death of Sir R. Vyvyan,
    Treon 136. By Tonkin, Swan pool, Trewoon 137. By the Editor,
    Penwenis, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase 137. Export of
    granite, heave at Swan pool, bricks 138
  Budock, St. ii. 127, 128
  Budocus, St. by Leland, iv. 270
  Budok, St. by Leland, iv. 283
  Buggin, Robert, ii. 319
  Bull, Rev. J. of Lezant, iii. 43
  Buller, Adm. Sir Edward, i. 321. Family 74, 221, 230, 246,
    266.――John, ii. 397. John T. 394. Family 170.――Francis, monument
    to, iii. 292. Colonel F. W. 293. James 361. J. F. 291, 383.
    William, Bishop of Exeter 301. Mr. 253, 361. Family 148 _bis_,
    390, 462. Edward, brother of the judge, and Mrs. iv. 37
  ―――― of Downs, James W. iii. 249. Mr. 249, 427
  ―――― Rev. John, of St. Just in Penwith, and of Perran Zabuloe, iii. 333
  ―――― of Lillesdon, Somersetshire, family, iii. 463
  ―――― of Morval, i. 317 _bis_. John 250. John 411.――John, ii. 85. Mr.
    396.――Anthony, iii. 230. Edward, Francis 249. James 229, 248, 249.
    Jane 229, 249. John 230, 248, 249 _bis_. John 249, 293, 297, 381
    _bis_, 463. J. F. 248 _bis_. Arms 249.――Elizabeth and John, iv.
    25. Mr. 22
  Buller, of Portlooe, Edward, the judge, iii. 333, 117
  ―――― of Shillingham, Francis, iii. 212, 215, 248, 381, 463. Francis,
    story of 463. James 248. John 463, 464. Richard 463. Sir Richard
    463 _ter._ Family 212
  ―――― of Shillington, Francis, i. 396
  Bullock, i. 28, 44, 78, 84.――Philip, ii. 189
  Bullœum, or Buelt, in Brecknockshire, iv. 8
  Bullsworthy, Barton, account of, iii. 3
  Bulteel, ii. 151, 319.――Miss, iii. 134
  Bunerdake, in St. Ives, iii. 359
  Bungay, Friar, supposed to have, by magic, raised a mist at the
    battle of Barnet, ii. 182
  Bungred, King of Mercia, i. 49
  Burdett, Sir Francis, chief promoter of the Reform Bill, and Miss,
    iii. 205
  Burgess, Mr. ii. 157.――Thomas and Thomas, iv. 77
  ―――― of Truro, i. 225
  Burgh, etymology of, i. 77
  ―――― Hubert de, Earl of Kent, iii. 349
  Burghert, married to Grenville, ii. 341
  Burgoigne, i. 177.――William, recorder of Exeter, ii. 189
  Burgundian court, ii. 188
  Burgundy, i. 107, 335――ii. 75――iv. 117
  ―――― Margaret Duchess of, ii. 188
  Burgus manor, ii. 253
  Burian, St. church, i. 149 _bis_――iii. 30, 431
  ―――― deanery, i. 147――iii. 30
  ―――― parish, i. 141――ii. 60, 265.――Etymology, i. 142
  ―――― St. parish, i. 146, 321
  ―――― or Burien, or Buryan, St. parish, iii. 30, 36, 283, 290, 322,
    425 _bis_, 428 _quat._
  BURIAN parish, by Hals, situation, antiquity, etymology, by Camden,
    i. 138. Founder, a regal peculiar, college, Pope’s usurpation 139.
    Boscawen Ros, Boscawen family 140. Boscawen downs, Dance meyns,
    and other ancient remains 141. Bolleit’s stone, Trove 142.
    Entrenchment there 143. Subterranean vault, royalists concealed
    there in civil wars, Pendrea 143. Burnewall, lake, aloe 144. By
    Tonkin, parish extensive, climate warm 144. Improvements of Mr.
    Paynter, Leigha, Boscawen Rose 145. By Editor, etymology, deanery
    146. Ecclesiastical abuses, non-residence, Pendrea, curious
    shellwork at Burnuhall 147. Shells at Porth Kernow, Boskenna,
    Vyvyans of Trelovornow, recluses at Boskenna 148. Church,
    trigonometrical survey, statistics, rector 149. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, and by Editor 150
  Burien’s, St. college, by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Burke, Lady Dorothy, ii. 93
  Burleigh, Lord Treasurer, i. 341. Mr. ii. 302
  Burlington, Earl of, ii. 326
  Burncoose, porphyry found near, ii. 136
  Burne, captain, ii. 25
  Burnell, Robert, iv. 146
  Burnevas, iv. 161
  Burnewall, etymology of, i. 144
  Burngullo, manor and village, iii. 197
  Burnuhall, curious shell-work at, i. 147
  Buroughs, of Ward bridge, i. 225
  Burrow Bel-les opened, description of, ii. 301
  Burthog, iv. 157
  Burveton, Walter de, iii. 2
  Burwaldus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415 _bis_
  Bury, St. Edmund, iii. 85
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 296
  Buryan parish, ii. 48, 282 _bis_――iv. 2
  Buryana, St. i. 138
  Buryas bridge, iii. 99
  Buryen’s, St. by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Busvargus, account of, ii. 86
  ―――― of Busvargus family, ii. 265, 286 _bis_
  Bute, Lord, ii. 245
  Butler, Simon, Lord of Lanherne, ii. 145 _bis_. Rev. Mr. 394
  ―――― Symon, iii. 139. Dr. 385, 434.――His Lives of the Saints, i;
    146――iii. 330, 332.――Colonel, iv. 189
  Bynany Castle, iv. 228
  Byron, Admiral John, his marriage, and “Narrative,” iii. 205.
    Grandfather of Lord Byron the Poet 205. Captain, his duel 152, 156
  Byzantine palace, ii. 366

  Cabellan, iv. 128
  Cabulian, i. 168 _bis_――iii. 89
  Cadbury, i. 337
  Cadd, Henry, iv. 18
  ―――― or Cadock, Earl of Cornwall, iii. 82, 462. His history, and
    arms, i. 203. Agnes or Beatrix, his daughter, iii. 463
  ―――― St. ii. 292
  Cadgwith, ii. 117, 331, 360――iii. 259, 424. Account of by Hals 421.
    By Editor 423
  Cadix, St. iv. 113
  Cadiz, iii. 98, 287
  Cadwallo, King of the Britons, iii. 284
  Caeling manor, iii. 267
  Caen in Normandy, university of, iv. 144, 145.――Michael Tregury, its
    governor, iv. 138, 144, 145
  Caer Brane, i. 230
  ―――― Broas, iii. 129
  ―――― Byan, iii. 129
  ―――― Cuby, i. 295
  ―――― Iske, i. 328 _ter._, 342
  ―――― Kief, iii. 316, 317 _bis_
  ―――― Kynock, account of, iii. 369
  ―――― Segont, i. 326
  ―――― Voza, iii. 366
  ―――― Went, in Wales, iv. 44
  Caerton, i. 261.――In Crowan, ii. 141
  Cæsar, i. 107, 323, 334――ii. 3――iii. 185 _ter._――Julius, i. 397. His
    Commentaries 193――ii. 237――iv. 116
  Cæsars, iii. 369
  Cagar quarry, ii. 117
  Cainham, in Holderness, Yorkshire, ii. 292
  Cair Kinan, by Leland, iv. 264
  Cairdine, by Leland, iv. 264
  Caitfala, i. 257
  Caius, St. Pope, and kinsman of Dioclesian, ii. 302
  Calais, i. 169 _bis_.――The siege of, ii. 159. Foy men assisted at
    39, 45
  Calamagrestis arenaria, iii. 6
  Calavega in Spain, i. 311
  Calceolaria, iv. 181
  Calenack, smelting house at, ii. 317
  Calendula tragus, iv. 181
  Calestock Rule, ii. 173
  ―――― Veor, ii. 173
  Calf, British-Cornish for, ii. 335
  Caliburne, i. 334
  Caligula, Caius, Emperor of Rome, iii. 184
  Calimontana, i. 206
  Call, family and arms, i. 162.――Sir William, ii. 231.――George, iv.
    41. Sir George 9, 41. Memoir of 9. Sir John 136. Sir William P. 11
  Callington borough, John Call, M.P. for, iv. 10
  ―――― manor, its possessors, ii. 313
  ―――― parish, i. 159, 316――ii. 231
  CALLINGTON parish, by the Editor, appendage to Southill, situation,
    boundaries, members of parliament, markets and fairs, manor, i.
    151. Church and town, monuments, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 152
  Callmady, ii. 136
  Calstock parish, i. 151, 159, 310, 316――iii. 101――iv. 6, 7.――Chapel
    at 322
  CALSTOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, founder,
    patron, first-fruits, incumbent, land-tax, free-fishing granted,
    salmon wear, i. 153. Cuthele, by the Editor, extensive mines,
    Cotehele 154. Description of 155. View of the chapel 156. Visit of
    George III. and Queen Charlotte 157. Garden chapel 157. Battle of
    Bosworth, Harewood, Sandhill 158. Statistics, rector, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 159. Canal 160
  ―――― Ruol, etymology, iii. 325
  ―――― Veor, iii. 321
  Calvin, iii. 188
  Calway, John, iii. 261
  Camber island, iv. 238
  Camborne or Cambourne parish, i. 128――ii. 56, 250 _bis_, 337――iii.
    248, 367, 387, 389, 390――iv. 5
  CAMBOURNE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    holywell, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    Pendarves, i. 160. Menadarva, story of Mr. Arundell 161. Roswarne,
    apparition, crane, Treswithan 162. By the Editor, rapid rise of
    the town, church tower, market, Pendarves 163. Menadarva,
    Roswarne, Crane, Mr. R. Trevithick, statistics 164. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Delcoath, and Cock’s kitchen mines 165. Soil good near the
    town, barren further north 166
  Cambræa, ii. 225
  Cambrensis, Giraldus, iv. 113
  Cambridge, i. 72――ii. 76, 104
  ―――― university, iii. 72, 454――iii. 270
  Cambridgeshire, ii. 97.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10
  Camburne de, i. 359. John and John 348
  ―――― parish, i. 261――ii. 136, 141 _bis_, 144, 234, 239 _bis_
  Camden, the antiquary, i. 85, 138, 146, 168, 178, 179――ii. 65, 172
    _ter._, 173, 237, 257, 258, 283, 293, 402, 403, 418――iii. 1, 24
    _bis_, 25 _ter._, 129, 149, 313, 336, 357――iv. 8, 44, 75, 79.――His
    Britannia, i. 120, 213, 220, 257, 325――iii. 430.――His history
    lecture at Oxford, ii. 233.――His annals of Queen Elizabeth, iii.
    368. His Editor 226
  ―――― Lady, i. 72
  Camel river, i. 117, 132, 372 _ter._, 377.――A winding channel, ii.
    40. Ran with blood 40
  Camelford borough, i. 74, 94, 117, 337, 340――ii. 154, 236, 338――iii.
    81, 89, 136, 235――iv. 20.――An adjective, ii. 171.――Battle at, iii.
    322. Roman road through 324.――The mayor of, ii. 236. Charles
    Phillipps, M. P. for 399――iv. 45
  ―――― Thomas Pitt, Lord, ii. 405.――Thomas Pitt, first Lord, i. 69.
    His talents 71. Thomas Pitt, second Lord, his birth and
    christening, education, history, and character 70. Death 71
  ―――― manor, iii. 27
  ―――― town, etymology, name, ii. 402. Market and a fair, not a fair
      town, borough, had its first charter from Richard, Earl of
      Cornwall 403. Revenue, arms, rent paid to the Duke 404. Dr.
      Lombard passing through afterwards died at 406
  Camellia Japonica, iv. 181
  Camellot, i. 337
  Camp, vestiges of, at St. Syth’s, ii. 405
  “Campaign in the West Indies,” iii. 160
  Campion, i. 382
  Camps, two ancient, i. 39
  Canada, subjugation of, iii. 218
  Canarditone, ii. 145
  Candlemas day, iii. 7
  Canedon priory, ii. 429
  Canna bicolor, iv. 181. Indica 181
  Cannall Lydgye, account of, ii. 254
  Canock, St. ii. 292
  Canon of the mass, i. 198
  Canons Augustine, i. 73 _ter._, 168, 209, 217, 382――ii. 61
  ―――― monastery of, ii. 2
  ―――― priory of, at St. Germans, dissolved, ii. 62
  ―――― of St. Augustine at Launceston, ii. 87
  ―――― black ii. 70.――Black Augustine, iv. 156
  ―――― Clementine, ii. 60
  ―――― regular, college of at Glasnith, ii. 136
  Canterbury, Archbishop of, i. 139――ii. 428.――Baldwin, i. 342. Robert
    Kilwarly 83. John Martin 87.――St. Just, ii. 287. St. Mellitus
    288.――Theobald, and Simon Mepham, iii. 115. Mellitus 3rd Archbishop
    of 167. William Sancroft 296. One of the seven bishops 299
  ―――― cathedral, iii. 246
  ―――― Gervase of, iv. 112
  Canute, King, ii. 60, 61, 70. His laws 61, 62.――Ridiculous legend
    of, iv. 96
  Canutus, King, ii. 60
  Cape Cornwall, ii. 290
  Capgrave, i. 295――iii. 332――iv. 93.――His book of English Saints, ii.
    292.――His Aurea Legenda, iii. 167
  Capgrove’s Life of St. Neot, ii. 396
  Cappadocia, i. 52, 388
  Capraria lanceolata, iv. 181
  Car, i. 172
  Cara Villa, Peter de, ii. 209
  Carantochus, St. i. 245
  Carantokes, St. by Leland, iv. 268
  Carbill, Robert Fitz-Hamon, Earl of, ii. 344, 347
  Carborro or Carburrow manor, iv. 130
  Carclaze tin mine, i. 50
  Carclew Barton, account of, iii. 224, 228, 229. Tin upon 225. Aisle
    belonging to, in Mylor church 228. Fine woods of 305
  ―――― purchased and improved by Mr. Lemon, ii. 85
  Carclew of Carclew in Milor, ii. 337
  Cardenham parish, ii. 187――iv. 47, 49, 50, 128, 129, 131, 155――or
    Cardinham, ii. 224, 260, 266
  Cardew, Rev. Dr. C. i. 402 _ter._――Dr. Cornelius, iii. 18.――Rev. Dr.
    master of Truro school, his monument in St. Erme’s church, iv. 85
  Cardiganshire, iii. 336
  Cardinan, Robert de, i. 167, 168
  Cardinham, by Leland, iv. 278
  ―――― Robert de, iii. 7, 225. Lord of Fowey 27.――Isolda de, iv. 107.
    Richard de 62. Robert de 101 _ter._, 102 _bis_, 103. Family 62, 107
  ―――― parish, i. 60, 112, 124――iv. 184
  CARDINHAM parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, manor,
    founder of church, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    ancient state, i. 167. Pedigree of Cardinham and Denham, daring
    exploit of John Denham 168. Called to the peerage, chapel built by
    Lady Denham 170. Glynn 171. Devynock 172. By the Editor, etymology
    172. Glynn 173. Statistics 173. Geology by Dr. Boase 174
  Caregrin, by Leland, iv. 291
  Careswell, ii. 71
  Carew, the historian of Cornwall, i. 152, 178, 210, 241, 258, 324,
    325, 350, 390――ii. 38, 39, 45 _bis_, 62, 69, 93, 147, 157, 172
    _bis_, 173, 197, 203, 204, 205, 230, 237, 251, 260, 261, 294
    _bis_, 358, 384, 394 _quat._, 398, 409 _bis_, 410, 411, 414
    _ter._, 417, 418, 419――iii. 14, 24, 25, 28, 39, 61, 91, 103, 149
    _bis_, 150, 171, 179, 235, 268, 270 _bis_, 276, 279, 287, 291,
    302, 313, 316, 328, 355, 357 _bis_, 374, 388, 389, 392, 437, 438
    _quat._, 439 _bis_, 443, 451――iv. 7, 8, 15, 23 _bis_, 24 _bis_,
    41, 96 _ter._, 112, 113, 132, 134, 162.――His history of Cornwall,
    ii. 296.――His survey of Cornwall, i. 167, 171, 172, 199, 252, 253,
    258, 323, 341, 372, 383, 384, 386, 396――ii. 3, 5, 7, 12, 17, 36,
    41, 89 _bis_, 90, 93, 107, 108, 120, 130, 175 _bis_, 180 _bis_,
    184, 186, 235, 236, 260, 282, 299, 337, 342 _bis_――iii. 66, 79,
    81, 102, 104, 105, 111 _bis_, 125, 129 _bis_, 133 _quat._, 139,
    140 _bis_, 168, 190, 381, 393, 436, 437――iv. 21, 34, 74, 111, 139
  ―――― Alexander, i. 33 _bis_. Sir Alexander 34. Anne 37. John 33, 34.
    Sir John 33, 153. Sir Nicholas 33. Nicholas, Lord 170, 171 _bis_.
    Reginald Pole 37. Richard 33 _bis_. Richard 38. Sir Richard 34.
    William 34. Sir W. C. 37. Sir William 86. Mr. 347. Family 33.
    Pedigree 34. Etymology of name 34, 35.――Sir Edmund, ii. 189. Sir
    George, commander of the Mary Rose frigate 341. Sir Peter 195.
    Family 93, 229, 415.――Sir A. M.P. for Cornwall, and his death,
    iii. 40. John 191. Right Hon. R. P. 439, 440. Sir William 437.
    Miss 60.――Colonel, iv. 185
  Carew of Anthony, John the historian of Cornwall, John his son, and
    Richard, iii. 193.――Miss, iv. 101. Richard, his epitaph, with
    comments, App. 14. iv. 378
  ―――― of East Anthony, Sir Alexander, i. 352
  ―――― of Haccomb, Sir Henry, iii. 373
  ―――― of Harrabear, Jane, Thomas, i. 352
  ―――― of Penwame, i. 223, 416
  Carey, William, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 4, 271
  ―――― of Clovelly, Sir George, iv. 139
  Cargaul manor, i. 397
  Cargol manor, iii. 267, 268, 270. Account of 267
  Cargoll parish, i. 15, 246, 250, 396, 403――ii. 52
  Cargreen, bargemen of, ii. 375
  Carhayes, the Trevanians removed to, no park at, iii. 202. House
    described 452
  ―――― manor, iii. 451
  ―――― parish, iii. 448, 451 _ter._, 453 _quint._ Rector of 452
  ―――― or Carhays, i. 299.――The name, iv. 9
  Carike road, i. 26――ii. 1――iv. 72
  Carilepho, William, Bishop of Durham, i. 290
  Carinthia, law of, iii. 186
  Carisius, St. history of, i. 379
  Carlian, ii. 308 _bis_
  Carloogus castle, iv. 228
  Carlynike, account of, i. 255
  Carlyon, i. 44. Derivation and arms by Hals 54. By the Editor
    55.――Rev. P. of Mawgan, in Pyder, ii. 160. Family 286
  ―――― of Menagwins, i. 55
  Carlyon of Trengreene, Philip, Thos. _bis_, i. 55
  Carmailoc, ii. 203, 211
  Carmelite friars, i. 83
  ―――― nuns, iii. 150
  Carmellus, i. 83
  Carmenow, ii. 293
  ―――― family, ii. 127――iv. 3, 41. Arms 72
  ―――― Carminow, or Carmynow, Jane, iii. 200, 208. John 208. John, and
    his daughters 131, 132. Ralph 129. Ralph, his arms, and contest
    with Lord Scrope for them 129. Traced to the reign of Arthur 138.
    Distinction awarded him 131. Trial detailed 137. Displeased with
    the sentence 131. His motto 131, 138. Robert 129. Thomas 131. Sir
    Thomas 200, 208. William and William 131. Mr. 464. Family 117,
    129, 135, 200, 208, 423. Heir of 140. Their sepulchre 132. Ancient
    monuments 132, 138. Partition of property 423
  ―――― of Carmenow, John, and his daughter, iii. 133. Family 214, 419,
    421. Their heirs 419
  ―――― of Fengollan, or Fentongollan, i. 65.――John, ii. 109. Drove the
    French from Marazion 171
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 128
  Carminow, Philippa, Sir Roger _bis_. Sir Thomas, i. 241.――Family,
    ii. 354, 358
  ―――― of Boconnock, family and property, iv. 97
  ―――― of Fentongollan, John, iii. 132. John 211 _bis_. John 211.
    Oliver 211, 212. Thomas 211. The great Carminows 211
  ―――― of Menhynyet, iii. 168
  ―――― of Penkevil, John, his hospitality, iii. 214. Oliver 215.
    Thomas 214. Their house pulled down 215
  ―――― of Polmawgan in St. Winnow, iii. 212
  ―――― of Resprin, John, iii. 214
  ―――― of Trenouth, Nicholas, iii. 357
  ―――― manor, iii. 137. Etymology of 137
  Carmynew of Fentongollan, i. 116, 117 _bis_
  ―――― of Resprin 171
  Carn Galva, iii. 244
  Carnadon prior manor, iii. 440
  Carnan bridge, ii. 2
  ―――― creek, iii. 224
  ―――― river, ii. 24
  Carnanton in Pedyr manor, iii. 125, 152. Account of 143. Left to the
    Willyams family and improved 159
  Carnarthen in Illogan, ii. 250
  Carnbray by Leland, iv. 266
  Cambre, monument to Lord de Dunstanville upon, iii. 389
  Carnbrea, i. 165.
  Carndeaw, etymology of, ii. 335
  Carndew, or Camsew manor, account of, iii. 61
  Carne, Richard, i. 9, 10. Family 9. Pedigree and arms 10.――Joseph
    and William, characters of, iii. 95. Mr. 100. Family 94
  ―――― of Glamorganshire, iii. 269
  ―――― of Penzance, ii. 318
  ―――― Bray, account of, ii. 237. Chapel at, account of 283
  ―――― Bray castle, in Luggan, ii. 237, 239, 283, 284
  ―――― Breanic, i. 10. Geology 14. Position and height 15
  ―――― Buryanacht, i. 6
  ―――― Godolcan, by Leland, iv. 264
  ―――― Kye, ii. 237. Quantities of tin at 238 _bis_
  ―――― Mark, tumuli at, ii. 132
  Carnedde, i. 192
  Carnedon barton, iii. 459
  Carnen, ii. 17
  Carnesew, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Carneton, i. 209
  Carnhangives, by Leland, iv. 267
  Carnkie, i. 165――ii. 250
  Carnon branch of Falmouth harbour, iii. 304 _bis_
  Carnsew, ii. 94
  ―――― in Mabe, iii. 125
  ―――― family, ii. 94. Sir Richard and Grace his wife, her monument,
    iii. 66
  ―――― of Bokelly, iii. 61. William 61.――Derivation, ii. 337
  ―――― of Carnsew family, iii. 61.――In Mabe, ii. 335, 337. George 335.
    Sir Richard and two Williams, all sheriffs of Cornwall 335. Arms 337
  ―――― of Tregarne, Sir Richard, ii. 335
  ―――― of Treon, i. 136, 137. John 137. Thomas 136. Arms 136
  ―――― of Trewone, Henry, iii. 61
  ―――― manor, i. 136, 137
  Carock, St. monastery at St. Veep, prior of, iv. 110
  ―――― St. Pill, priory of, iv. 111
  Caroline, Queen, ii. 407
  Carpenter, Humphrey, jun. i. 303. J. P. 3. Rev. J. P. 204. William,
    shot at Skewis 269, 270 _bis_, 271 _quat._, 272 _quat._, 273
    _quint._, 274 _ter._, 275 _ter._ Family 302
  Carpenter of Mount Tavy, near Tavistock, ii. 400. J. P. 400,
    406.――John and Patience, iii. 301. Mr. 42.――Mr. iv. 45
  Carr, Lady Charlotte, iii. 172
  Carraton downs, account of, iii. 44
  ―――― hill, i. 196――ii. 154
  Carreth, account of, i. 298
  Carrow family and arms, i. 35
  Carsbroc, ii. 427
  Carshayes rectory, i. 72
  Carter, i. 223, 224. Honor 216. Richard 215.――Honour, iii. 237.
    Thomas of Dartmouth, Devon 315.――Colonel, iv. 189. Heirs of the
    family 111
  ―――― of St. Colomb, i. 222. John 223. Richard 222. Arms 223.――John,
    iii. 325 _bis_. Richard and family 325
  ―――― of Staffordshire, i. 222
  Carteret, Ralph de, ii. 209. Lord 348, 352. George Lord, married
    Grace, heiress of the Granvilles, Countess Granville 346.――Louisa,
    iii. 225. Lord Carteret 255, 256, 353.――Lord, iv. 16, 136
  Carthage, Scipio’s remark on its fall, ii. 426.――Destruction of,
    iii. 106.――Merchants of, iv. 168
  Carthagena, iii. 218
  Cartharmartha, account of, iii. 42
  Carthew, i. 260, 386, 393, 398
  ―――― copper mine at, ii. 256
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 255, 256. Mr. etymology of name and arms 255
  Cartuther, iii. 172
  Cartwright of Aynhoe, Northamptonshire, family, and W. R., M. P.
    iii. 152
  Carvaghe or Carvolghe, in Morvan and St. Tes, iii. 359
  Carvath, i. 49
  Carvean, iii. 355 _bis_. Etymology 364
  Carverth, account of, iii. 61
  ―――― Captain Henry, his history, ii. 94.――Gawan, iv. 77.――Mrs. iii.
    86. Mr. 88 _bis_. Family 61
  Carveth, or Carverth in Mabe, ii. 94――iii. 124
  ―――― O. A. i. 20.――Family of Thoms assumed the name, Thomas and
    arms, ii. 94.――John, iii. 82
  ―――― of Peransand, Anthony and his daughter, iii. 176. Family 187
  Carvinike, account of, i. 386
  Carvolgue manor, iii. 243
  Carwithinick, i. 241
  Cary, Henry, ii. 423
  ―――― of Clovelly, Devon, Mary, widow of Sir George, iii.
    269.――Family, i. 177
  ―――― Bollock or Bullock park, iv. 6, 7, 9. Account of 8
  ―――― of Cockington, Robert, i. 108
  Carynas, account of, i. 292
  Casa gigantas, i. 194
  Cassan, iii. 331
  Cassibelan, i. 10, 334
  Cassibelynn, ii. 3
  Cassiolus, Abbot, iii. 434
  Cassiter, ii. 2
  ―――― street, Bodmin, and its etymology, i. 79
  Cassiteridan islands, ii. 2
  Cassiterides, i 199
  Castell-an-Dinas, account of, i. 219, 228. Soil 230
  Castelle-an-Dinas, by Leland, iv. 262
  Castille, Alonzo and Frederick 2nd, kings of, i. 311
  Castle Caer Dane, iii. 322. Account of 319
  Castle Carne Bray, ii. 237, 239
  ―――― Cayle, iii. 342
  ―――― Chiowne, description of, iii. 244
  ―――― an-Dinas, account of, iii. 47.――or Dunes, iv. 53, 54. In St.
    Colomb 140
  ―――― Denis, i. 220
  ―――― Dore, iv. 102. Money found at in consequence of dreams 102
  ―――― hill, iv. 136
  ―――― Horneck, ii. 218. Near Penzance 285.――Account of, iii. 83
  ―――― Kaerkief, account of, iii. 320. Well in 322
  ―――― Keynock, ii. 187
  ―――― Killy Biry, or Killy Biny, account of, i. 372
  ―――― Kitty, i. 329
  ―――― Kynoek, i. 77, 88, 94
  ―――― Kynven, i. 329
  ―――― Terrible, ii. 420
  ―――― Treryn, iii. 31. Removing and replacing the rock 31
  ―――― Werre, account of, ii. 156
  Castledour, by Leland, iv. 279
  Castlemaine, Roger Palmer, earl of, husband of the Duchess of
    Cleveland, ii. 11. Appointed governor of Surat, ib.
  Castles after the Conquest, generally built of lime and stones, iv. 140
  ―――― in Cornwall, list of, iv. 228
  Castleton, Lawrence, Prior of St. Syriac’s, iv. 113
  Castletown, i. 261
  Cat eating the dolphin, i. 395
  Catacluse, stone of, iii. 178 _bis_
  ―――― Cliffs, pier at, iii. 179
  Catcher, William, iv. 77
  ―――― of St. Clements, John, iii. 327 _bis_
  Catchfrench, ii. 77 _bis_. Account of 68
  Catherine, queen of Charles the Second, iii. 148
  ―――― St. ii. 36. Her history 36. Her body found, its miraculous
    transportation, her wheel 37
  ――――’s St. ii. 41
  ――――’s St. chapel at Brightley in Kilkhampton, ii. 348
  ―――― St. chapel near Launceston, ii. 419
  Catholic church, general councils of, iv. 165
  Catholic clergy, i. 338
  Cattelyn, John de, i. 246
  Catullus, i. 183
  Catwater, iii. 108
  Cavaliers, song of the, ii. 278
  Cavall, i. 221
  ―――― Mr. arms, ii, Etymology, marriages of heirs, division of lands,
    ii. 335
  Cavedras, smelting-house at, ii. 317
  Cavendish, Lord George, ii. 326. Major, monument to 325
  Caweth of Caweth in Mabe, family and arms, ii. 337
  Cawsand, iii. 108
  ―――― bay, iii. 379
  ―――― village, iii. 379
  Caxton, i. 342
  Caxton’s, William, “Fructus temporum,” i. 338
  Cayl castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  Caynham church, in Ludlow, Salop, ii. 292
  Ceall Lidain, iii. 331
  Cecil, Sir Robert, ii. 9. William 213. Sir William, lord treasurer,
    married the daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke 16. Earl of Salisbury
    66. Robert, Earl of Salisbury 213
  Ceely family, i. 256.――Name changed to Silly, iii. 237
  Cell-Cester, i. 326
  Celt, a thunderbolt, iv. 32
  Celtic, i. 172, 342
  ―――― people, iii. 49
  Celts of Cornwall, their conversion, ii. 240
  Ceriseaux, _see Sergeaux_
  Chad, St. patron of Litchfield, Worcester, and Shrewsbury, ii. 391.
    His death 392. Summerhouse dedicated to 391. Inscription in it 392
  Chalk ridges in England, iii. 10
  Challons, of Challons-Leigh, Catherine and Robert, ii. 354
  Chamberlayne, heir of, ii. 109
  Chamberlyne, Lord, iii. 155
  Chambers, Mr. iii. 156
  Chamond, John, ii. 415. His monument 416. Sir John 414 _bis_.
    Richard, remarkable for long life, honours, and numerous relations
    414. Thomas and arms, ib. Residence 416. Family 357, 395 _bis_,
    416.――Family, iv. 18
  ―――― of Trewhythenick, i. 207
  Champernon of Intsworth family, ii. 251, 254. John 251 _bis_. Sir
    John 251. Richard 251 _bis_, 254. Arms 254
  ―――― of Madberie, Devon, Richard and Sir Richard, ii. 251
  Champernoun, William, iv. 102, 103
  Champernown, Jane, ii. 118. John 70 _bis_. Thomas 118. Family
    119.――iii. 47
  ―――― of Halewin, ii. 107
  Champernowne, i. 348
  ―――― Richard, i. 36. Family 293, 313.――Henry, iii. 294. William 276.
    Mr. 448. Heiress 294. Family 276――iv. 107, 127
  ―――― of Beer Ferries, i. 347
  ―――― of Clyst Champernowne, Devon, family and arms, ii. 254.
  ―――― of Darlington, Mr. iii. 8
  ―――― of Halwyn, arms, ii. 254
  ―――― of Porth Prior, ii. 65
  ―――― of North Taunton, near Modbury, arms, ii. 254
  ―――― of Umberleigh, near Modbury, arms, ib.
  Chancellor, Lord, i. 270 _bis_――ii. 52, 123――iii. 109――iv. 65.――Sir
    Thomas More, ii. 53.――Richard Lord Scrope, iii. 129
  Chancery court, ii. 52 _ter._, 53――iii. 228
  Chancery suits, ii. 120
  Chandois, Lord, ii. 223
  Chandos, Brook, Lord, ii. 32
  Channel, iv. 12
  Chapel, old British, at St. Ives, ii. 261
  ―――― Carne Bray, iii. 429
  ―――― Comb, i. 12
  ―――― an Crouse, iii. 312
  ―――― garden, iii. 147
  ―――― house, iii. 256
  ―――― Jane, iv. 164
  Chaplin, John, i. 214.――Miss, iii. 11
  Chapman, Edward, i. 237. Story of 238.――Edward, iii. 16
  Chappell Amble, account of, ii. 336
  Chappie, Sergeant, i. 270, 274
  Charlemagne, iii. 335
  Charles, John, iii. 346
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 21, 25, 27, 66, 71 _bis_, 213, 235, 258, 277,
    305, 333, 335, 344, 396, 404, 405, 410, 411――iii. 61, 81, 134,
    142, 144 _ter._, 146 _bis_, 151, 154, 157, 161, 183 _ter._, 199
    _bis_, 213, 243, 269, 303, 315, 318, 358 _bis_, 463――iv. 75 _bis_,
    107, 114, 119 _bis_, 152 _bis_, 156, 162, 172.――His bed-room at
    Cothele, i. 157.――Identified with the established church after the
    Restoration, ii. 20. Sir Beavill Grenville’s services to 343.
    Fired at 411. D’Israeli’s Life and Reign of 78.――At Leskeard, iii.
    20, 42. Entertained at Trecarrell 42. Drew up his forces on
    Carraton Downs 44. His lines in answer to Ben Jonson 146. Le
    Strange’s life of him 145.――A battle of his army near Stratton,
    iv. 13. His managers of affairs 14. Lord Sandys raised a regiment
    of foot and of horse for 58. Marched to Cornwall, quartered at
    Liskeard 185. Surprised a party at Lord Mohun’s house, made a
    proposal of peace 186. Battle with Essex 187. Parliamentary
    generals forced their way through his army, his troops stopped the
    roads, were driven back, he sent Captain Brett forward, and for
    his success knighted him on the spot 188. Granted a parley 189.
  Charles 2nd, King, ii. 3, 5, 8, 21 _bis_, 25, 28 _ter._, 38, 44, 51,
    52, 53, 54, 55, 95, 100, 142 _bis_, 158, 220 _bis_, 235, 277, 302,
    316, 333, 345, 346, 421.――iii. 76, 104, 116, 134, 135 _bis_, 148
    _bis_, 162 _ter._, 186, 201, 209, 212 _bis_, 250 _bis_, 274, 363,
    381, 460, 463, 464――iv. 14, 57, 75, 94, 102, 107, 157.――His
    restoration, and war with the French and Dutch, ii. 27. Peace with
    Holland, debt to Captain Penrose 29. Reproved by Mr. Killigrew,
    his jester 15. Fonder of him than of his best ministers 22
  Charles 2nd, ship, ii. 375.
  ―――― Prince, iii. 185, 363
  ―――― 5th, Emperor, i. 411.
  ―――― 8th, Emperor, bought the empires of Constantinople and
    Trebizond, ii. 368
  ―――― Martel, King of France, iv. 126
  Charlestown, i. 11, 48――iv. 104
  ―――― in South Carolina, attack upon, ii. 268. Ship nearly reached,
    driven back ib.
  Charleton, iii. 438.――Lieut.-colonel, iv. 186
  Charlotte, a story of, ii. 103
  ―――― Queen, i. 157
  Charlwoodia australis, iv. 181
  Charters, inviolability of, identified with liberty, i. 389
  Chasewater, ii. 304, 310, 317. Almost a town 308
  Chatham, William Pitt, Earl of, i. 69 _bis_. Obelisk to him 71
  Chattisham, Suffolk, ii. 149
  Cheapside, ii. 191
  Checkenock or Killignock, iv. 139
  Cheep, Captain, iii. 205
  Cheesewring, i. 184 _quin._, 178――iii. 45 _bis_.――Description of, i.
    185, 186 _bis_, 190, 193
  Cheiney family, iv. 43
  Chelsea, ii. 98
  Cheni, Robert de, ii. 119
  Cheny, i. 383
  Chersonesus, ii. 125
  Chester, iii. 109
  ―――― choir, dedicated to St. Walburg, iv. 125
  ―――― Miss, iv. 129
  Chevy Chase, ballad of, i. 240
  Cheyney, Charles, Viscount Newhaven, iii. 458. John 116.――John de,
    John, John, and John, iv. 43. Sir John and Sir John, both Speakers
    of the House of Commons 44. Ralph de, Robert de, and William de, one
    of them in the Crusades, arms 43
  Cheynoy in St. Endellyan, iv. 43
  Chiandower, ii. 84, 120, 124, 125. Etymology 125. Tin smelting-house
    at 82
  Chichester, ii. 292.――John Lake, Bishop of, iii. 296. One of the
    seven 299
  ―――― Charles, iii. 276
  Chilcot, i. 8, 323
  Chilcott, William, iii. 276
  Chiliworgy, i. 189
  China, ii. 290――iii. 183
  ―――― clay or stone in St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 454, 455 _ter._
  Chinese wall, i. 189――iii. 289
  Chiowne, iii. 289
  Chippenham, i. 257
  Chiverton in Perran Zabuloe, iv. 90.――Account of, iii. 333
  ―――― Sir Richard, i. 314.――Richard and Miss, iii. 162
  Chiwidden, St. the first smelter of tin, iii. 330
  Cholwell, Mr. master of Wike St. Mary School, iv. 134
  Christ Church College, Oxford, iii. 296, 297 _bis_――iv. 86,
    95.――Rev. J. Bull, canon of, iii. 43.――Dean and chapter of, iv. 97
  Christian church divided by heresies, ii. 63
  ―――― festivals appointed for the days previously dedicated to pagan
    rites, ii. 288
  Christianitatus, Deanery of, Exon, ii. 319
  Christopher’s, St. iii. 183
  Chrysocoma cernua aurea, iv. 181
  Chrystallography, ii. 47
  Chubb, Egidius, iii. 153
  Chudleigh rectory, i. 130
  ―――― James, ii. 189, 190. John Sheriff of Devon 235.――General, iv.
    13 _bis_. Taken prisoner 15
  Chudley family, ii. 395
  Chulmleigh hundred, Devon, iv. 101
  Chun castle, i. 229 _bis_
  Church blown up, i. 215
  ―――― of England, iii. 298, 300
  ―――― lands confiscated, iii. 155
  ―――― tower at St. Enedor, fall of, i. 387
  Churches, the different uses of Roman Catholic and Protestant, iv. 103
  Churchill, Anne Duchess of Marlborough, i. 127. Lady Henrietta 234.
    Henrietta Duchess of Marlborough 126. John Duke of Marlborough
    126.――Charlotte, iii. 217
  Chydiock, coheir of, iii. 140
  Chyendur, iii. 324 _bis_
  Chyncoos, account of, ii. 316
  Chynoweth, i. 289. Account of 291
  ―――― of Chynoweth, i. 291. Arms 292.――Anthony, John and his three
    daughters, and Mrs. iii. 125. Arms 126
  Chyton, iii. 326
  Chywarton, iii. 324 _bis_. Account of 325
  Chywoon, ii. 104
  Cileintenat, Roger, iv. 27
  Cineraria populifolia, iv. 181
  Cinque ports, ii. 38
  Ciriac, Caricius or Cyret, St. iv. 112
  Cissa, King of the South Saxons, ii. 284
  Cistercian abbey, at Newenham, Devon, iii. 293
  ―――― or White Friars, i. 83
  Citrane, i. 162
  Civil war, iii. 92, 152, 158――iv. 75, 87, 96.――Havoc of, iii. 294.
    Part taken by Cornwall in 298
  Civil wars, ii. 387, 396, 410――iii. 183, 264, 274.――Trees at Tehiddy
    cut down in, ii. 240
  Clahar, iii. 258
  Clair, Clear, or Cleer, St. parish, iii. 13, 43, 45 _bis_, 260, 266, 371
  Clanricarde, Earl of, ii. 93
  Clare, Earl of, iii. 148. Hollis Earls of 147. John and Gilbert 148
  ―――― St. history of, i. 175. Elopes from her parents and becomes an
    abbess 176
  ―――― poor, nuns, i. 176
  Clare’s, St. well, description of, i. 177――ii. 315. Treasure
    supposed to be concealed and discovered there 316
  Claremont place, Brunswick-square, ii. 396
  Clarenbaldus, King’s chaplain, ii. 426
  Clarencieux the provincial herald, iii. 130, 131
  Clarendon, Earl of, iii. 200.――Advises the imprisonment of Sir
    Richard Grenville, gives an unamiable character of him, ii. 345. A
    partial historian 350
  Clarendon press, ii. 163――iii. 251
  ―――― province, Jamaica, ii. 120
  ――――’s History, i. 114
  ――――’s Rebellion, ii. 347
  Clares, nunnery of, at Truro, and their well at Edles in Kerrier,
    iv. 73
  ―――― poor, ii. 19. First brought to England 19. Nunnery of, at
    Liskeard 170
  Claret, receipt for making, ii. 186
  Clarke, i. 311 _bis_. Rev. J. E. 316.――Jeffrie, ii. 16. Mr. 162
  Classe, G. of Torrington, Devon, ii. 281
  Claude Lorraine, picture by, i. 195
  Clayton, Mary and Sir William, iv. 107
  Clear, St. Cape, iii. 6
  Cleare family, their arms, i. 177
  ―――― of Mertock, Robert, i. 177
  ―――― of Treworgy, i. 177
  Cleare, St. of Tudwell, i. 177
  Cleather family, i. 19, 198.――John sen., Samuel, and arms, iii. 325
  ―――― St. i. 308, 377
  ―――― parish, i. 1――ii. 36――iv. 61 _bis_, 63.――Rocks in, iii. 23
  CLEATHER, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    first fruits, incumbent, land tax, history of St. Cletus, i. 197.
    Basill, the Trevelyans 198. Foye Fenton 199. By Tonkin, Basill
    199. St. Eledred 200. By the Editor, Bordeny Abbey, story of Sir
    John Trevelyan 200. Statistics, vicar, and Geology by Dr. Boase 201
  Cleave house, iii. 256
  Cleder, i. 2
  Cleer, St. parish, i. 381, 413
  CLEER, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    first fruits, land tax, name, i. 174. Etomology, saint’s history,
    mendicant friars 175. St. Clare’s well, family of St. Clare,
    Treworgy, Conock, Tremabe, Treworock 177. Pennant, Wring-Cheese,
    the Hurlers, and the other halfstone, Dungerth’s monument from
    Camden 178. From Bond 179. From Polwhele 180. From Hals 181. Bond
    continued 182. Cheesewring 184. Gumbs house 184. Druidical basons
    186. Rock of white marble near Looe, Sharpy Torry 187. View from
    188. Extract from Ovid 189. Kilmarth Hill 189. Druids, from the
    Monthly Magazine 192. Etymology of Kilmarth, cromlech at Trethevic
    193. King Doniert, father of St. Ursula, story of Ursula and her
    nuns, Claude Lorraine’s picture of their embarkation 195. By the
    Editor, other monuments, King Doniert’s death 195. The Hurlers,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 196
  Cleer, St. town, i. 193
  Clement 5th, Pope, iii. 115
  ―――― 8th, Pope, anxious to reform the Greek Church, ii. 370
  ―――― St. Pope and Martyr, iii. 344.――His history, i. 206
  ―――― St. island and chapel, iii. 287
  ―――― St. parish, i. 393, 404
  CLEMENT, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, Condura, the Earl of Cornwall, i. 202. Caddock
    his son, Lambesso 203. Oliver King, ancestry of Samuel Foote,
    Penare 204. Tresimple Park, Polwhele 205. History of St. Clement
    206. By Tonkin, the Polwheles, Penhellick, Trewhythenick, Lambesso
    207. By the Editor, Polwhele, Rev. Charles Collins, Penhellick,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 208
  Clement’s, St. church, near Temple Bar, iii. 142
  ―――― parish, ii. 315, 318――iv. 70, 75, 80, 92――or Clemens, iii. 180,
    190, 354 _bis_
  ―――― street, Truro, has a church of its own, iv. 76
  Clements, Thomas, iii. 246 _bis_, 247 _ter._――Rev. D. of Warleggon,
    iv. 131
  Clemowe, Richard, iii. 387
  Clemsland or Climsland manor, account of, iii. 7
  Clerk, Henry, i. 213 _bis_. John 315. Paul 10.――Bernard, ii. 427.
    Sir George, his seat Pennycuick, county of Edinburgh 20
  Clether, St. parish, ii. 377 _bis_, 378
  Clethra arborea, iv. 181
  Cletus, Bishop of Rome, his history, i. 197
  Cleveland, Barbara, Duchess of, ii. _bis_.――Marquis of, i. 300
  Clicker Tor, ii. 79――iii. 172, 173 _bis_, 180
  Clickitor in Menheniot, iii. 373
  Clies family, iii. 83
  Clifford, Rosamond, i. 240.――Thomas, D. D. iii. 239
  Clifton, iii. 94. Near Bristol 251
  ―――― in Landulph, ii. 365, 371, 372――iv. 373 _quin._, 375. Account
    of 375
  Climerston, ii. 247
  Climsland Prior manor, iv. 9, 11
  Clinton barony, i. 151
  ―――― John 1st Lord, i. 151.――Arabella, ii. 313. General Sir Henry
    268. Lord 231 _bis_.――Margaret, heir of the Earl of Lincoln, iii.
    216. R. G. W. Trefusis, and C. Trefusis, Lords and Lady 230
  Clive, abbey of, Somersetshire, iii. 349, 350
  ―――― Colonel, ruined by a contested election, i. 390.――Family, iii. 94
  Cloak, iii. 222
  Cloake, Dr., iv. 74
  Cloberry, Mr. i. 381.――Miss, iii. 66
  ―――― of Carnedon family, iii. 459
  Clobery, Lucy, ii. 153
  ―――― of Bradstone, iii. 44
  Clode, Major, iii. 338
  Clodworthy, John, iii. 189
  Clome, popular prejudice against in Cornwall, i. 267
  Clopton, Hugh, iv. 134
  Clotworthy, i. 416
  Clowance, i. 266. Description of 288
  Clowberry, William, iii. 2
  Clowens, account of, i. 261
  Cluniac monks, iv. 111
  Clutterbuck, Captain, iii. 288
  Clyfton in Landulph, Theodore, Paleolagus died at, ii. 365
  Clymsland, ii. 429
  Clyse, John, iii. 83
  Coach, ancient, i. 358
  Coade, Edward, iv. 65
  Coalition ministry, i. 389.――Of Lord North and Mr. Fox, ii. 245
  Coat, Sarah, iii. 461
  Cobbeham, John de, iv. 153
  Cobham, Lord, i. 87.――Family, iii. 117.――John de, iv. 13
  Cobœa scandens, iv. 181
  Cock, William, i. 224. Family 234.――John and Robert, ii.
    160.――Anthony and John, iii. 382
  Cock’s kitchen, i. 165
  Cocke, Thomas, iii. 387
  Cocks, Anne, Charles, Lord Somers, Reginald, and family monument,
    iii. 229
  Code of St. Wen, John, iii. 325 _bis_
  Coffin, Rev. C. P. of Tamarton, iv. 42
  ―――― of Hexworthy, Richard, iii. 3
  ―――― of Portledge, Richard, and Miss, iii. 3.――Richard, iv. 40
  Coffyn, Miss, ii. 236
  Cohan, St. iii. 180
  ―――― Martyr parish, iii. 181
  Coill, King of Colchester, i. 237
  Coke, John, i. 20 _bis_
  ―――― of Tregaza, Christopher, i. 395. Thomas 394, 395, 396
  ―――― of Trerice, John, singular history of, i. 394. Arms 395, 396
  Colan parish, iii. 139, 275
  ――――, Little parish, i. 230――iii. 267
  COLAN parish, or Little Colan, by Hals, situation, boundaries, named
    from the Barton, ancient state, founder of church, impropriation
    and value of benefice, patron, rector, incumbent, land tax, family
    of Colon, i. 209. Coswarth 210. Cudjore 211. By Editor,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 212
  Colburn and Bentley, iii. 95
  Colchester, ii. 76
  Coldnell, John, Bishop of Salisbury, ii. 7
  Cole family, ii. 216, 217, 336. Captain Christopher 216. Captain
    Francis, R.N. 216, 217. John 123. Rev. John, D. D. and Samuel
    216.――Rev. Samuel, D.D. of Sithney, iii. 446. Rev. Mr. of Luxilian
    56. Mr. 66
  ―――― MSS. i. 300
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170
  ―――― of Devon, Philip, iii. 211, 215
  Coleridge, Rev. J. D. iii. 4
  Coleshill family, ii. 256.――Sir John, killed at Agincourt, his
    infant son heir of the family, iv. 16
  Colgan, iii. 434
  Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica, iv. 106
  Collectio spinosa, iv. 181
  Collet, Sir John, Lord Mayor of London, iv. 134
  Collier family, iii. 277.――Rev. Mr. of St. Tudy, iv. 95
  ―――― of Bosent family, iii. 348
  Collins, Edward, i. 403 _bis_. Rev. Edward 351, 352, 353, 366.
    Elizabeth 352. Rev. John 208, 353. Wrote a note to Steevens’s
    Shakpeare 353. John 403.――Rev. John of Redruth, ii. 243.――Edward,
    iii. 339. Rev. Edward, the Editor’s great grandfather, rector of
    Sithney, Phillack, and Gwithian 446. The poet 219
  Collins of Treworgan, in St. Erme, John, i. 353, 396. Arms
    396.――Edward, iii. 343. Family 343, 382
  ―――― of Treworgye, Edward, ii. 146, 147. Family 146
  ―――― of Truthan, Edward, iii. 165
  Colliton, Mr. iv. 23
  Collon, Little, i. 212
  Collquite or Killyquite, account of, iii. 65
  Collrun in Perran Zabuloe, iii. 319
  Collarian farm, account of, iii. 47
  Collwell, Thomas, ii. 120 _quater._ Family 120
  Collyar, i. 213
  Collyer family, i. 135.――Rev. Mr. ii. 92
  Collyns, Thomas, prior of Tywardreth, his correspondence with
    Cromwell, Vicar General to Henry 8th, iv. 105. Described 106. His
    election, and death 106
  Colmady of Longdon, ii. 137
  Colomb, St. parish, i. 56, 148, 211, 213, 215, 225, 250, 404――ii.
    67, 85, 113, 217, 253.――Or Columb, iii. 149, 160, 324, 395――iv. 53
  ―――― St. Lower, i. 209, 249――iii. 267
  ―――― Major, St. i. 115, 140, 161, 209, 230, 235, 392 _bis_, 407――ii.
    198――iii. 61, 139, 141, 142, 143, 161――iv. 2, 137, 140, 151
  COLOMB Major, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient
    state, i. 212. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    history and description of church, Arundel chapel 213. History of
    St. Colomba, Jesus chapel 214. Contest for its revenues 214.
    Church blown up 215. Subscription for its repair, pinnacle
    destroyed by lightning 216. Steeple, College of Black Monks 217.
    History of Bishop Arundell, four free chapels, weekly market 218.
    Fairs, Castle-an-Dinas, the Coyt 219. King Arthur’s stone,
    Retallock barrow, the nine maids 220. Truan, pedigree of Vivian
    221. Epitaph on Mrs. Vivian, pedigree of Carter 222. Trevithick,
    Trekyning, Nanswiddon 223. Tresuggan, Trekyninge Vean, Bespalfan
    chapel 225. By the Editor, the Saint, Nanswhyden, consumed by
    fire, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase, Fatwork mine,
    Manganese mine 227. Castle-an-Dinas by Borlase, tower built on the
    walls 228. By the Editor 229
  Colomb Minor, St. church, i. 74――iii. 177
  ―――― Minor, St. parish, i. 245, 251――iii. 269, 275
  COLOMB Minor, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    revenues impropriated, vicars stipend, patron, land tax, church well
    kept, i. 230. Trelvye, Ryalton 231. Mundy family 232. Penitentiaries
    233. Towan, Hendræ, Trevithick 234. By the Editor, Rialton, new
    quay, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase 235
  ―――― St. Porth, i. 235, 388
  ―――― St. rectory, i. 218
  ―――― St. tower, iv. 229
  ―――― or Columb, St. town, i. 218, 227――iii. 280――iv. 187. Road to
    Launceston from 46
  Colomba, St. i. 213
  Colomba’s St. day, i. 214
  Colon of Colon, i. 209, 210 _bis_. Jane, Margaret 209. Roger 209
    _bis_.
  Colon manor, i. 210
  ―――― manor, Little, account of, i. 209
  ―――― parish, i. 386
  Colquite, i. 262――ii. 180――iv. 22
  Colshill, i. 262
  ―――― of Tremada, John, i. 319 _quat._
  Colshul, of St. Ewe, i. 418. Sir John, _bis_, Joan 418
  Colshull, Joan and Sir John, iii. 316
  Colston family, iii. 95
  Colt, i. 220
  Coltdrynike, account of, ii. 67
  Columba, iii. 331
  Columbes, St. by Leland, iv. 261
  Colyn, Oto, iv. 127
  Comb Alan, ii. 402
  Combe, Barton, i. 132――iii. 181
  ―――― castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  ―――― Henry, iv. 90
  Comborne, i. 288――ii. 136 _bis_
  Come to good, ii. 35
  Come to good Sunday, ii. 35
  Common Pleas, Court of, in Cornwall, ii. 53
  Commons, House of, i. 390 _bis_, 355――ii. 66, 71, 75, 76, 95, 158,
    159 _bis_, 170.――Resolved not to sit on account of breach of
    privilege, i. 345.――Sir John Cheyney twice speaker of, iv. 44
  Comneni, imperial race of, ii. 366
  Comprigney, account of, ii. 318
  Conant, St. iii. 396, 397, 398 _bis_.
  ―――― or Gonnet’s park and meadow, iii. 396, 397
  ――――’s St. well, on Trefrank, iii. 393, 396
  Conanus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Condura or Condurus, Earl of Cornwall, i. 36, 202――ii. 320.――His
    history, i. 203
  Condura manor, ii. 320
  Conerton, ii. 260; or Connerton 145 _bis_
  ―――― manor, exchanged for St. James’s, iii. 140; or Connorton manor,
    account of, ii. 145, 147. Exchange of 145, 147, 148
  Connock, Mrs. iii. 20
  Conock of Treworgy, i. 177. John, etymology of name, arms ibid.
  ―――― of Wiltshire, i. 177
  Conor, etymology, i. 202
  ―――― Mr. master of Truro school, iv. 85
  Conorton of Lanherne, ii. 148
  Conqueror, i. 43――ii. 89――iii. 14, 142 _bis_, 264, 462――iv. 62. His
    death 71
  Conquest, ii. 70, 147, 238, 343――iii. 150, 226, 443――iv. 81 _bis_,
    140. Consort or West Lower hundred, i. 38
  Constans, the schismatic emperor, murderer of St. Martin, ii. 125
  Constantine, Emperor, i. 327. History of 237.――St. iii. 175, 178
  ―――― or Constanton parish, ii. 136――iii. 59, 74, 77, 124――iv. 2
  CONSTANTINE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land tax, i. 236. Saint’s
    history, Trewardevi 237. Story of Mr. Chapman 238. Churches
    endowed by Constantine and other monarchs 240. Notice of Carmenow
    from Tonkin 241. By the Editor, Merther, Trewren, Carwithenick
    241. Chapels at Benalleck and Budeckvam, statistics, feast, vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 242
  Constantine, St. church of, iii. 175, 178 _ter._ Font at 178 _bis_
  ―――― St. his festival, iii. 178, 179 _bis_
  ―――― St. well of, iii. 175
  Constantinople, ii. 368 _bis_, 370――iii. 187 _bis_――iv. 100, 101,
    148.――Arius bred at, ii. 63
  ―――― emperors of, calling themselves emperors of Rome, ii. 365. Last
    who reigned at, ib.
  ―――― empire of, gold to Charles 8th, ii. 368
  Constantius Chlorus, Emperor, i. 237 _ter._
  Constat of Bishops of Landaff, i. 382
  Convent, the first in Christendom, Franciscan, i. 81
  “Conveyancer, Noye’s,” iii. 154
  Conworthy, west, iii. 103
  Conybeare, Rev. J. E. i. 111
  Conyland, ii. 230
  Cood, ii. 320
  ―――― Michael, iii. 134
  ―――― of Pensimple, William, iii. 238
  Coode, Anne, iii. 248. John 143, 248. Richard 248. Miss 463. Family
    253. Heir of 361. Arms 249. Monuments to 253
  Cook, Mr. ii. 377
  Cooke, family, i. 18.――Sir Anthony, ii. 373. Sir Anthony of Giddy
    Hall, Essex 7, 15. His daughters learned, and their great marriages
    16. Katherine 7, 15. Oswald 423.――Dr., of London, iii. 187
  ―――― of Mevagissey, Joseph, and Paschas, i. 357
  ―――― of Treago, John, i. 248. Thomas 259
  ―――― of Tregussa, i. 142
  Cooper, Anthony Ashley, Earl of Shaftesbury, ii. 379. Bishop
    66.――Rev. Dr. Samuel, iii. 72
  Copgrave, i. 414, 415
  Copleston family, i. 347――iii. 276
  ―――― of Copleston, i. 347. John 104
  Coplestone family, ii. 292. The great 293, 294. Hereditary esquires
    of the white spur, and very rich 293. John tried for murder, and
    John his son, and arms 293
  ―――― of Colbrook, Devon, ii. 292
  ―――― of Warleigh, Christopher, iii. 250
  Copley, Sir Joseph, ii. 76
  ―――― of Bake family, iii. 252
  ―――― of Sprotborough, ii. 76
  Copper, seldom appears on the surface, but is mixed in tin lodes,
    ii. 134. Mode of selling in Cornwall 318. Veins and branches of
    native 360
  Copyholds, renewals of, iv. 54. Converted in Cornwall into leases
    for life, ib.
  Coran, account of, i. 419
  Corbean, i. 49
  Corbet, Anne, i. 36, 203. Catherine 296
  ―――― of Allenaster, co. Warwick, Anne, iii. 456, 463. Robert, her
    father 463
  ―――― of Shropshire family, iii. 404, 405
  Cordall, John, iii. 318 _bis_. John and Ralph 218
  Cordelier or Franciscan friars――_see Friars_
  Coren of Bullsworthy, John, iii. 3
  ―――― of Stephen’s family and arms, iii. 3
  ―――― St. ii. 113
  Corey, Rev. Richard, i. 377
  Corfe Castle, Henry Bankes M.P. for, iii. 221
  Corfu, ii. 368
  Corington, Sir John, his widow, i. 314
  Corinth reduced by the Turks, ii. 367
  Cork, i. 115
  ―――― county, iii. 331
  ―――― Edmund Boyle, Earl of, ii. 385
  Corker, Robert, of Falmouth, i. 399.――Mr. ii. 11.――Robert, iii. 444
  Corlyer of Tregrehan, Thomas, i. 259
  Cornall, Teek, iii. 287
  Cornavy, ancient name for Cornwall, iv. 39
  Cornburgh, Avery, iii. 405
  Cornehouse monastery, i. 407
  Cornelius, St. i. 244
  Cornelly parish, i. 300, 424 _bis_――ii. 356――iii. 182, 188, 189, 354
    _bis_
  CORNELLY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, consolidation
    with Probus, i. 242. Patron, incumbent, land tax, impropriation,
    ancient state, name in 1521, Tredenike 243. By Tonkin, etymology,
    Trewithenike 243. Saint 244. By Editor, Gregor family 244.
    Statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 245
  Corneth, John, ii. 375
  Cornish acre, ii. 89, 120
  ―――― antiquities, ii. 392
  ―――― Britons, King Athelstan’s victory over, iv. 40
  ―――― clergy ii. 89
  ―――― critics, their mistakes, iii. 320
  ―――― crown, iii. 451
  ―――― demesnes, iii. 451
  ―――― diocese, visitation of, iii. 456
  ―――― families educated at Truro school, iv. 85
  ―――― historian, ii. 95
  ―――― insurrection, iii. 387
  ―――― kings, iii. 451
  ―――― lawsuits, ii. 53
  ―――― men in Charles the second’s service, ii. 29
  ―――― minerals, Mr. Williams’s fine collection of, ii. 134
  ―――― miners, iii. 229.――Marched against the combined fleet, ii. 245
  ―――― names, App. 9, iv. 312 to 318
  ―――― office for administration of the sacrament, ii. 31
  ―――― people, their insurrection against Henry 8th, ii. 192
  ―――― proverbs, i. 354, 368
  ―――― rebels, ii. 186. King answers their demands 195
  ―――― see, i. 116
  ―――― tinners, iv. 167
  ―――― tongue spoken late, ii. 31 Scawen’s dissertation upon, iv. 193
    to 221
  ―――― trials, ii. 53
  ―――― vocabulary, iv. 39
  ―――― Wonder Gatherer, ii. 173――iii. 392
  ―――― works translated, iii. 288
  ―――― family, i. 10.――Rev. G. J. ii. 309. William 216. Elizabeth,
    lived to a hundred and thirteen, iv. 17
  ―――― of Trevorike, William, ii. 255 _bis_. Miss 255. Mr. 256
  Cornmarth, ii. 133
  Cornua ammonis, plentiful at Keynsham near Bath, ii. 297
  Cornwall, Archdeacon of, William de Augo, ii. 426
  ―――― archdeaconry, iii. 460
  ―――― assizes, i. 173.――Held at Launceston, ii. 422
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 18.――ii. 54, 299 _bis_. Berwoldus 60. Suffragan
    to the diocese of Exeter at St. German 72.――Bishops, iii. 415
  ―――― bishopric of, i. 96. 231.――ii. 95――iii. 456
  ―――― cathedral of, i. 73.――Mr. Whitaker’s discussion upon, iii. 408
  ―――― county, i. 327, 328, 334――ii. 19――iv. 48, 49.――Afield of
    political speculation, i. 69. Encroachment of the sea on its
    coasts 60. Rebellions in 86, 88.――The back door of rebellion, ii.
    186. Mr. Rashleigh the first collector of minerals in 47. Recent
    histories of 47. Smallest parish in 49. Judge Dolben a happiness
    to 52. St. German in 65 _bis_. Parochial history of 66. Ancient
    mining of 82. Romantic scenery of 88. Dunstone prevalent in 88.
    Service on the King’s coming into 89. First boarding school for
    ladies in 91. Inundation of sand buried the northern parts of 149.
    Rebels made prisoners in 197. Executed 198. Seven Saxon Kings
    dined together in 284. A petrifier of serpents wanted in 292.
    Fragmentary rocks in 330. Blessings proclaimed to the builders of
    Bideford bridge in all the churches of 341. Contributed to by most
    families of note in 341. Successful royal campaign in 345.
    Gentlemen’s seats in, embellished from Stowe 351. Gold found in
    354. Inaccessible situation of 386. Select vestry in all large
    parishes of 388. Part taken in civil war by 396. Lan used as a
    prefix in 424. Launceston the capital of 431. Hills and bad roads
    of 431.――Relics of antiquity in, iii. 52. Vallies in, heaps of
    rubbish 59. Medicinal waters of 79. No vicarage churches in 114.
    Granite in 432. Devon dismembered from 104, 462. Unsettled state
    of 246. First great iron works in 305. The west of, reduced by
    Athelstan 322. Prince Charles in 363. St Sennan came to 431 _bis_.
    Error of some writers upon 6.――Alien priories in, iv. 101.
    Earthworks in 126. Settlement of the Saxons in 125. Many
    gentlemen’s sons of, educated at Wike St. Mary’s school 134. The
    Northern entrance into, was formerly by Stratton 16. Trevalga in
    the most desolate part of 67. London architecture reaching to 81.
    Copper ores of, purchased by Mr. Coster 89. Truro the first town
    in 85. Essex and his army entered, iv. 185
  ―――― Custos Rotulorum of, Lord Robarts, ii. 379
  ―――― Geological Society of, ii. 291――iii. 424――iv. 122
  ―――― History of, Mr. Fortescue Hitchens assisted in compiling, ii. 224
  ―――― hundreds of, account of them, App. 13, iv. 317
  ―――― Lords Lieutenant of, Earl of Radnor, ii. 380.――Two Earls of
    Mountedgecumbe, iii. 107
  ―――― members of parliament for, ii. 351 _ter._ Sir John Eliot 71.
    Sir William Lemon 85.――Francis Basset, iii. 229. Admiral Boscawen
    219. Hugh Boscawen 40. James Buller 249. Sir A. Carew 40. Sir
    William de Ferrers 165. Sir B. Granville 40. Sir William Lemon
    229, 249. E. W. W. Pendarves 367. Mr. Praed 9. Thomas de Prideaux
    56. Sir Thomas Sereod 165. Nicholas Trefusis 40. Sir W. L. S.
    Trelawny 301. John Trevanian 200, 201, 204. His letter 204. Sir
    Richard Vyvyan 136. Sir R. R. Vyvyan 137.――Francis Gregor, iv. 89.
    John de Tynten 96
  ―――― militia, iv. 37.――Charles Phillips, Lieut.-col. of, ii. 399.
    Jonathan Phillips, Captain in 399.――Mr. Williams, Colonel of, iii
    159.――Charles Phillips, Lieut.-col. of, iv. 45. Henry Thompson,
    Captain in 109
  ―――― sheriffs of, ii. 47, 68. Basset 235 _ter._, 304, 394, 395.
    Carnesew 186, 335 _ter._ Chamond 414 _quater._ Champernon 251.
    John Enys 97. Grenvill 341 _quater._ William Harris 139. Orchard
    343. Treffry 43 _ter._――Mr. Amy, iii. 235. Thomas Le Archideakene
    405. Arundell Sir John 141, 274. Sir J. 213. Renfry and Renfry
    141. Humphrey Borlase 238, 268. Hugh Boscawen 213. Buller Sir
    Francis 463. John 249. Richard and Sir Richard 463. Carmenow John
    132, 133. Ralph 129. John and J. T. Coryton 346. Stephen Durnford
    374. Peter, Sir Peter, Richard, Richard and Sir Richard Edgecumbe
    104. John Eliot 337. George Herisey 417. James 419. Richard 417.
    Richard Gedy 337. Edward Herle 41. John de Mawgan 148. Erasmus
    Pascoe 343 Richard Penrose 444. Gregory Peter 176. Mr. Popham 446.
    R. Prideaux 56. Thomas Rawlings 280. John, and Sir John Reskymer
    133. Sir John 147. Hugh Rogers 445. Sir Richard Sergeaulx 65. John
    de Tregaga 211. John Tremayne 101. Charles, Sir Charles, Hugh,
    Hugh, Hugh, William, Sir William, and Sir Wm. Trevanian 199.
    Walter de Treworther 269. Francis, Hanniball, Michael, Richard,
    and Richard Vyvyan 134. John, Thomas, and Thomas Walesbury 116.
    John Worth 62
  Cornwall county, standard of, iii. 332
  ―――― Carew’s survey of, index to, iv. 381
  ―――― duchy, i. 3――ii. 87, 155, 375, 404――iii. 14, 15, 26 _bis_, 28,
    57, 286――iv. 6, 9, 14, 127, 186.――A manor annexed to, ii.
    46.――Robert Corke, receiver of, iii. 444. Holdings 286.――Manor, iv. 6
  ―――― Duke of, i. 75, 202, 253, 323, 413――ii. 145, 229, 230, 309,
    365, 376, 401, 402――iii. 24, 28, 44, 64 _ter._, 81, 223, 328,
    349――iv. 7, 8, 61, 71, 125. His lands 186. Edward I. 296. Prince
    Edward 339.――Edward the Black Prince, ii. 422――iv. 71. Frederick
    Prince of Wales, ii. 84. Solomon, a Christian 338. William 408.
    Edward the Black Prince, iv. 71
  ―――― Dukes of, iii. 14, 15, 24――iv. 72.――Their Exchequer Hall, iii.
    26.――Had a castle at Helstone, ii. 402. List of them from the time
    of Edward III. i. 373
  ―――― Duke and Earl of, i. 318――iv. 7, 8, 78
  ―――― Earl of, i. 151, 153, 202, 318, 322, 323――iii. 448, 462.――His
    castle at Truro, now in ruins, iv. 76.――Ailmer, i. 73. Algar 73,
    74, 94 _bis_, 95. Caddock 203, 254. His history and arms 203.
    Condur 254. Condura 36, 202. Cradock 36. Edmund Plantagenet 253,
    254. John 296 _bis_. John of Elham 256, 339, 341. Piers Gaveston
    338. Reginald 36. Richard 36, 340.――Robert 402. Edmund, ii. 138.
    Prince John, his treason 177. Protected Pomeroy 178. Reginald 420,
    428. Richard 109, 138, 403, 422. Richard Plantaganet 155. Richard,
    King of the Romans 8, 156. Robert 418. Roger 128. William
    418.――Ailmer, iii. 462. Algar 462. Cadock 82, 462 _bis_. Agnes or
    Beatrix, his daughter 463. Condura 462. Edmund 15, 26, 27. Son of
    Richard King of the Romans 285. Edward of Caernarvon 302 _bis_.
    John 27. King 448. Reginald 353. Richard 14, 15, 26, 27, 47, 268,
    350. King of the Romans, &c. 15, 19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448 _bis_.
    A promoter of monastic establishments 285. Robert 14, 27, 44. Earl
    of Morton, &c. 291, 345, 349, 352, 451 _bis_. Robert Guelam, Earl
    of Morton, &c. 462.――Edmund, iv. 4. His history 368. Gothlois 94.
    John 71 _bis_. Of Eltham, his history 371. Succeeded to the crown
    71. Reginazd 169. Incorporated Truro 77. His history 353. Richard
    26, 27, 41. His history 356. Robert Earl of Morton, &c. 15, 67,
    102, 118. Roger 41. William Earl of Morton, &c. 100, 111
  ―――― Earls of, ii. 38, 145, 257 _bis_, 259, 260, 384, 422――iii.
    79, 168, 442, 448, 452, 456――iv. 6.――Held their court at Tintagell
    castle, ii. 402.――Their history, app. 12. Before the Conquest, iv.
    346 to 348. After the Conquest 348 to 373
  ―――― Earls of, Norman, iv. 81
  ―――― Earldom of, ii. 156, 379, 384――iii. 22, 452.――Raised to a
    Dukedom, ii. 155. Lost its feudal sovereignty 392
  ―――― King or Earl of, i. 322, 323
  ―――― Kings of, iii. 326, 452
  ―――― Prince of, i. 327
  ―――― Princes of, ii. 158――iii. 13
  ―――― Launceston Castle, their seat, ii. 418
  ―――― See of, reasons for removing, iii. 416
  ―――― sovereigns of, iii. 365
  ―――― Geffery, iii. 449. Joan 448. John 318. Sir John 27. Richard de
    448. William 449. Family 198
  Cornwall, of Burford in Shropshire, family, iii. 449
  Coronilla glauca, iv. 181
  ―――― valentina, iv. 181
  Corpus Christi College, Oxford, iii. 406
  Corrack road, ii. 281. Account of 284
  Corringdon, Rev. Mr. ii. 340
  Corsican gold, iv. 33
  Cortyder, by Leland, iv. 280
  Corvith, in St. Cuby, iii. 362
  Cory, Rev. W. ii. 364
  Coryton family, i. 410――ii. 32――iv. 130. Johanna, iii. 166. John
    346. Sir John 164, 165 _bis_, 266, 345, 346. John. T., 346 _bis_,
    348. Built a fine house 166. Family 161, 165, 346. Name 165
  ―――― of Crockadon, John, i. 315
  ―――― of Newton family, i. 315.――John, ii. 231. William 305.――Anne
    and Catherine, iii. 162. Sir John 162 _ter._, 176. Sir John’s widow
    163. William and Sir William 162. Family 161. Arms 162.――Sir John,
    iv. 9
  ―――― of Pentillie, Mr. iii. 372.――Of Pentilly, J. T. i. 316
  Cosawis, or Gosose, ii. 100
  Cosens, Nicholas, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 317. Family 319
  Cosowarth, Miss, i. 387
  ―――― Bridget, Sir Samuel, and Nicholas, iii. 135. Miss 116. The
    estates passed to Vyvyan 135
  ―――― of Nanswhiddon, i. 387
  ―――― of Penwarne family and heir, iii. 191
  Cossa, i. 326
  Cossens, i. 313
  Coster, Mr. of Bristol, i. 226.――A coppersmith there, took Mr. Lemon
    into partnership, iv. 89
  Coswarth, i. 210. Account of 211
  ―――― Bridget and Sir Samuel, i. 222. Arms 211
  ―――― of Coswarth, Bridget, i. 211. Dorothy 210. Edward 211 _bis_.
    John 210 _bis_. John 211 _quat._ Nicholas, _bis_, Robert, _ter._
    Samuel, Sir Samuel, _bis_, 211. Samuel 212. Thomas 211
  Coswin, account of, ii. 142
  Cosworth, Miss and Mr. iii. 193
  Coswyn de, John, and family, ii. 142
  Cotehele, i. 154, 158 _bis_, 159――ii. 108, 115.――View of  the Chapel
    at, i. 156.――Thick woods about, iii. 102
  ―――― de Cotehele, Hilaria and William, i. 154
  Cotele, iv. 70
  Cotland, ii. 71
  Cottell of Alderscombe, Alexander, and family, ii. 351. Arms 352
  Cotterell’s dispute with Le Grice for the lands of the latter, ii. 277
  Cottey, Christopher, and Mr. iii. 327
  Cottle, Alexander, and his father, iii. 116
  Cotton, William, i. 141. William, F. S. A. 228.――Sir John, iii. 235
    _bis_, 237. His sister 237. William 233, 244. William, Bishop of
    Exeter 233. William, son of the Bishop 234, 235. Family and their
    monuments 233.――Family, iv. 45, 62
  ―――― MSS. 154
  Couch, Reginald, ii. 90
  Coulson, Henry, and Rev. T. H. ii. 359
  ―――― Rev. H. T. of Ruan Major, iii. 420
  Coumb, St. Lower, parish, iii. 139
  Coumbe village, iii. 255
  Council, general, of the British clergy, at St. Alban’s, ii. 64
  Councils, ecclesiastical, i. 100 _ter._
  Court barton, iii. 448 _bis_――ii. 395, 396
  ―――― in Lanreath, ii. 394
  ―――― in St. Stephen’s, the Tregarthyns removed to, ii. 109
  ―――― of chivalry, iii. 129
  ―――― leet at Helston, ii. 145.――Of Ryalton, i. 231 _bis_
  ―――― manor, ii. 110
  ―――― roll, tenure by copy of, ii. 51
  ―――― rolls, iii. 234.――Of a manor for three centuries, in
    possession of the editor, iv. 54
  Courtenay, Sir Edward, i. 33. Elizabeth, Florence, and Isabel 65.
    Jane 33. Maud 65. Peter, Bishop of Exeter 373.――Kelland, ii. 353,
    354, 384. Richard and Thomasine 386. Walter 189. William, sheriff
    of Devon 235. Lord William and Sir William 189. Family 354, 362,
    375.――George, iii. 214. Archbishop 171 _bis_. Monument to a 439.
    Family 373, 437.――Nicholas, iv. 112. Lawrence 113. Family 41, 97.
    A branch of at Treveryan 109. Arms 96
  Courtenay of St. Benet’s, Henry, i. 113.――In Lanyvet, Henry, iv. 188
  ―――― of Boconock, Edward, i. 43. Of Boconock and Haccomb, Emelyn,
    and Sir Hugh 64
  ―――― Earls of Devon, Edward, i. 63, 64 _quat._――Edward 11th Earl,
    iii. 436. Edward 12th Earl 437 _ter._ Edward 16th Earl 64, 65
    _bis_.――Hugh, i. 63.――Thomas, and Thomas his successor, iii.
    350.――William, i. 64
  ―――― Henry Marquis of Exeter, i. 43, 64――ii. 375
  ―――― of Haccomb, Sir Hugh and Margaret, i. 262.――Sir Hugh, iii. 437
    _bis_
  ―――― of Moland, Elizabeth and Sir Philip, i. 64
  ―――― of Powderham, i. 411
  ―――― of Tremere family, ii. 385, 387. Charles and Humphrey 385.
    Kelland 385 _bis_. William, ib.
  ―――― of Trethurfe family, Sir Peter and William, ii. 385――or
    Trethyrfe, i. 65――iii. 133
  ―――― i. 171, 177――ii. 292
  ―――― of Boconnock, iv. 157
  ―――― of Penkivell, ii. 54
  ―――― of Trehane, William, i. 397――ii. 130
  ―――― of Tremeer, i. 396――iii. 187
  ―――― of Trethurfe, i. 397
  Courts of Westminster, Cornwall remote from, ii. 145
  Covent Garden theatre, Mr. Dagge manager of, ii. 34
  Coventry, Lady Anne, i. 37.――Henry, iii. 252
  Coverack, ii. 331 _quater._ Noted for a lucrative trade 324
  ―――― cove, a transport lost in, ii. 325
  ―――― pier, ii. 331
  Covin, i. 205
  Cowley contrasted with Killigrew, ii. 22
  Cowling, John, and his daughter, iii. 288
  Cowlins of Kerthen, i. 266
  Coysgarne, iii. 326
  Coyt, in St. Colomb, account of, i. 219
  Coytfala, now Grampound, i. 353
  Coytpale, i. 257
  Cozens, or Cosens, William, iv. 77
  Crackington cove, ii. 88
  Cradock Earl of Cornwall, i. 36
  Craggs, Harriet; and James, Secretary of State, ii. 75
  Craig Vrance, ii. 305
  Crane, i. 162, 164.――In Cambume, ii. 123
  ―――― of Crane, Richard, family and arms, iii. 387
  Crantock church, i. 74, 248, 250
  ―――― college, i. 247, 250
  ―――― parish, i. 230, 249, 289, 293――iii. 267, 343
  CRANTOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 245.
    Ancient state and revenues, impropriation, vicar’s stipend, patron,
    incumbent, land tax 246. Consecrated well, name of church, Treganell
    247. Treago 248. Gannell creek, Tremporth bridge 249. By Tonkin,
    saint’s name, impropriation, incumbent. By the Editor, collegiate
    church 250. Statistics, feast, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 251
  Crantoke, by Leland, iv. 285
  Crawley, Judge, iii. 144
  Creation, i. 260
  “Creation of the World,” Mr. Keigwyn’s translation published by
    Editor, iii. 329
  ―――― and “Flood,” i. 109.――Translated, iii. 288
  Crediton, Devon, ii. 69――iii. 248, 415.――St. Boniface born at, iv. 126
  ―――― Leofric, Bishop of, iii. 416. Livingus, Bishop of 415
  ―――― see of, iii. 415
  ―――― college, iii. 7
  Credys in Padstow, not noticed in Tanner, ii. 388
  Creed, Apostles’, in Cornish, i. 252, 260
  ―――― church, i. 258
  ―――― parish, i. 140, 300, 424――ii. 90――iii. 170, 195, 198, 354, 371,
    448, 450, 451
  CREED parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 251.
    Apostles’ creed in Cornish 252. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, Tybesta, Grampound borough, privileges 253.
    Fairs and market, chief inhabitants, Trevelick, Tencreek 254.
    Pennans, Nantellan, Carlynike 255. Nancar 256. By Tonkin,
    Trencreek, Granpont, ib. Trevellick, Trewinnow, Pennance 257.
    Trigantan, the church 258. By the Editor, Tybesta and Grampound
    ibid. Hawkin’s family 259. Differences of the Cornish creeds,
    statistics, vicar 260
  ―――― rectory house, i. 258
  Creeg meer, account of, iii. 319
  Cregoe, account of, i. 297
  ―――― i. 205. Rev. John 424.――Edward, ii. 54. M. G. 58
  Cremble passage, iii. 105
  Cressy, battle of, iv. 72
  Crewe, Rev. Mr. ii. 86.――Elizabeth-Anne and John, iii. 220. Mr. 185, 211
  Crewenna, St. i. 263
  Crews, Rev. Mr. i. 253
  Crewys, Sir Alexander, i. 347. Mr. of Lesnewith, iii. 22. Mr. 276
  Cricklade, i. 258
  Criticism, &c. letters on, ii. 76
  Croaker of Crogith, i. 299
  Croan, i. 371. Account of 376
  Crocadon, account of, iii. 162
  Crockaddon, account of, i. 313, 316
  Crocker, Michael, i. 8
  ―――― of St. Agnes, Miss, iii. 80
  Croftilborow, iii. 439
  Croftshole, iii. 439 _bis_
  Crogith, account of, i. 299
  Croker, Sir John, ii. 189. Robert 337, 338
  Cromlech at Trethevye, i. 193
  Cromleigh at Lanyon, iii. 89
  ―――― at Malfra, iii. 90
  ―――― in Morva parish, iii. 90, 244
  ―――― in Zennor parish, iii. 90
  Cromleighs, description of them, iii. 90
  Cromwell, Oliver, i. 204――iii. 186, 188, 381.――Curious letter from,
    ii. 47.――His interregnum, i. 204――ii. 277――iii. 421, 449.――His wars
    with Charles 1st and 2nd, iv. 75.――Richard, iii. 188.――Thomas, his
    correspondence with the prior of Tywardreth, iv. 105. Described 106
  Crook, Judge, iii. 144
  Croome family, iii. 192
  Cross family, ii. 252, 397
  ―――― of Bromfield, Somerset, Mary and Richard, iii. 315
  ―――― posts, establishment of, i. 56. Farmed by Mr. Allen 57
  Crosses on moor stones, i. 195
  Crossman, ii. 54
  Crosstown village, iii. 255
  Crostetedon, i. 236
  Crowan parish, i. 118, 160, 355――ii. 122, 139, 141 _bis_, 144,
    272――iii. 7, 65, 384, 389, 441, 442
  CROWAN parish, by Hals, boundaries, ancient state, value of
    benefice, patronage, rector, incumbent, land tax, endowment,
    Clowens, pedigree of Seynt Aubyn, i. 261, Tregeare, by Tonkin,
    etymology 263. Tregeare, Hellegan, Clowance 264. By the Editor,
    patronage of the church, oversight of Hals, Sir John Seynt Aubyn,
    Lady Seynt Aubyn’s marriage portion 265. Stoke Damarel, Devonport,
    advowson, by Lysons, Kerthen 266. Shewis, Henry Rogers’s
    resistance of the sheriffs, fatal consequences 268. His escape,
    arrest, trial 269. Evidence 270. Lord Hardwicke’s charge 278.
    Proclamation 279. His son’s account 280. His death 282. Sir John
    Seynt Aubyn’s letter on the occasion 284. Monuments in the church,
    chapel of ease, charity school, statistics, feast, vicar, Geology
    by Dr. Boase, celebrated for mines, beauty of Clowance 288
  Crown demesnes, iii. 365
  ―――― patronage, ii. 231――iii. 222, 223, 253, 284, 349――iv. 40, 97,
    127, 137, 160. Let 40
  ―――― “Noye’s Rights of,” iii. 154
  Crudge, Adry, i. 357
  Cruetheke, iii. 372
  Cruff of Borew, i. 421
  Crystalline rocks in Linkinhorne, iii. 45
  Cubert church, i. 74
  ―――― parish, iii. 39, 275, 333
  Cuby parish, i. 413――ii. 2――iii. 354, 371, 402, 403, 451.――St. iv. 117
  CUBY, St. parish, or Tregony, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    antiquity, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, history
    of the saint, i. 294. His shrine, privileges of the borough 295.
    Castle, arms of the borough, family of Pomeroy 296. Crego 297.
    Attempts of Mr. Trevanion to render the river Val navigable,
    Carreth 298. Hospital 299. By Tonkin, Crogith, bridge, ruins of
    the old town, and of St. James’s church, its patron 299. By the
    Editor, ancient town, castle, and priory 299. Statistics, vicar,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 300
  Cudan Beke, i. 32
  Cudanwoord, ii. 59
  Cudden Point, iii. 311 _ter._, 375. Curious custom at 311
  Cuddenbeck, ii. 68
  ―――― borough, ii. 69
  Cudjore, account of, i. 211
  Cudworth, Mr. iv. 94
  Culloden, victory of, caused the fall of the Whigs, ii. 244
  Cumberland, i. 289――iii. 246
  Cuming, Alexander, iii. 445
  Cummin, Rev. Mr. ii. 398
  Camming, Sir Alexander, and Mr. iii. 9
  Curgenven, Captain and Mrs. iv. 4
  Curgurven, Rev. William, iii. 357 Curlyghon or Curlyon, ii. 155.
    Account of 301
  ―――― family, ii. 301
  Curlyon family, descendants of Richard, i. 54
  Curnow, John, iii. 343 _ter._ and three daughters 343. Family 54,
    343.――John, iv. 55
  Curran Boake, ii. 61
  Currie or Karentocus, St. church iv. 12
  Curthop, i. 298
  Curthorp, i. 298
  Curtutholl, account of, iii. 170
  Curvoza, account of, iii. 362
  Cury parish, i. 118, 356――ii. 80, 126 _bis_――iii. 110, 127, 128,
    257, 416, 419
  CURY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient state, family of Bochym,
    Arundell’s rebellion, i. 301. Family of Bellot, Bonython 302.
    Bochym, Shewis 303. By Editor, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 304
  Custendon, i. 236
  Custom house establishment at St. Ives, ii. 261.――At Truro, iv. 74
  Customs, laws of, iii. 423.――Mr. Lamb, collector of, at Fowey, ii.
    47――and excise, laws of, iv. 175
  Cuthbert, St. his history, i. 289.――Bishop of Lindisfarne, iv. 42
  ―――― St. parish, i. 215, 254――iii. 267, 313
  CUTHBERT, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient state, value of benefice, patron, rector, land tax,
    saint’s history, i. 289. Translation of his relics and the
    bishopric from Lindisfarne to Durham 290. Holywell, Chynoweth 291.
    Carynas 292. By Tonkin, plague, holy well 292. Hallanclose,
    church, Kelsey 293. By the Editor, statistics, feast, vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 293
  Cuthill, i. 154
  Cutler, Sir John and Mary, ii. 380
  Cyric, St. the monk of, iv. 114
  Cyric’s, St. creek, iv. 113

  Dacia, i. 336
  Daddoe, Rev. J. of Merthyr, iii. 189
  Dagge, Mr. possessor of Killigarreen; and Mr. and his brother,
    manager of Covent-garden theatre, ii. 34
  Dal, monastery at, ii. 90. St. Sampson’s remains enshrined there 90
  D’Albert, Sir Perdiccas, ii. 176
  Dalbier, a parliamentary general, iv. 186 _bis_
  Dallaway’s Chichester, iii. 205
  D’Alneto family, ii. 375
  Dameliock castle, i. 328 _bis_, 329 _bis_, 330 _ter._, 331 _ter._,
    332――iv. 94.――Siege of by King Uter, i. 329
  Damelsa castle, iv. 140
  ―――― house, iv. 140
  Damerell, Sir John, iii. 60. Arms 61
  Damholt, Lord, French Admiral, ii. 342
  Danaus, his daughters, iii. 265
  Dance Meyns, i. 141 _bis_
  Dandy family, ii. 397
  ―――― of Trewenn, William, i. 326
  Danell, i. 383
  Danes, i. 290――ii. 27――iii. 262, 365――iv. 140. Burn Bodmin, ii. 60.
    Bishop Stidio’s loss by 61. Arrived in West Wales (perhaps
    Cornwall), and defeated on Hengiston downs 310. Probably buried in
    the three barrows 317. Their castles 423.――Destroyed Nutcell
    abbey, iv. 126
  D’Angers of Carclew, Isabella, iii. 225 _bis_. James 225. Margaret
    225 _bis_. Richard 225. Family 224. Arms 226
  Daniel, Nicholas, i. 375.――Richard, iv. 77.――Family, i. 434
  Daniell, Thomas, i. 58――R. A. ii. 33 _bis_, 318. Successful in
    mining 33. Thomas 33 _bis_. Built a house at Truro of Bath stone
    33. Member for West Looe 34. Samuel, his Chronicle 284.――Mr.
    succeeded Mr. Lemon, married Miss Elliot, iv. 89
  Daniell’s Chronicle, i. 339
  Danish barrows, iii. 319
  Danish camp, iv. 77. Dissertation upon 78
  Danmonia, iv. 39
  Danmonii, i. 199
  Danvers, Sir John, iii. 316, 317.――Family, i. 121
  ―――― of Dantesy, Wilts, Sir John, iii. 317, 318
  Daphne odora, iv. 181
  Dapifer, Richard, iv. 107
  Darell, Thomas, and family, iii. 240
  Darley family, and Rev. Mr. ii. 226
  Darlington, Lord, proprietor of Camelford borough, sold it since
    Reform bill, ii. 405
  Dart of Dart Ralph, Devon, family, iii. 193
  ―――― river, iii. 103――iv. 158
  Dartmoor, i. 170, 188――ii. 213――iii. 45, 431. Forest 265――iv.
    6.――Hills, iii. 253. Chain of granite hills to Land’s End, from 120.
    Road across them 121
  Dartmouth, ii. 83――iii. 105.――Pirates conveyed to, iii. 41
  ―――― William Legge, first Earl of, iii. 206
  Darwin, Dr. lines by, i. 30
  Daubeney, Giles, Lord, i. 87
  ―――― Catherine and Ralph, ii. 251. Lord 189, 191. Sheriff of
    Cornwall 186
  Daungers of Carnclew, Isabel, iii. 303. James 303 _bis_. Margaret 303
  Davenport, Judge, iii. 144
  Davey of Creed, i. 144
  David, King of Israel, i. 305, 329
  ―――― St. iii. 434 _bis_.――Bishop of Menevia, i. 24, 304, 321, 382
    _ter._ His history by Hals, and by the Editor 305. Legend of 307
  Davidstowe barton, account of, i. 305――parish, i. 21, 197, 199,
    382――ii. 401――iii. 22, 180, 275――iv. 61 _bis_, 124, 125
  DAVIDSTOWE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of living,
    incumbent, land tax, i. 304. History of St. David, barton of
    Davidstowe 305. By Tonkin, St. David. By Editor, his history more
    at large 305. Impropriation of tithes, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 307
  Davie, John, iii. 387
  ―――― of Burnuhall, i. 147 _bis_, 148
  ―――― of Orleigh, Charles, i. 380. Account of his wife, ib.
  Davies, Henry, i. 282 _bis_.――Henry, iii. 6. Henry, great uncle to
    the Editor 307. Rev. George, Rector of Perran Uthno 307 _bis_.
    Rev. John, ditto 306, 307. Miss 429. Family 35, 47,
    216.――Catherine, the Editor’s aunt, iv. 165. William 55.――Family,
    ii. 170, 218, 304
  Davies of Bosence, i. 360. Catherine 360, 362. Elizabeth 362, 363.
    Henry 360 _bis_, 361, 365. John 360 _bis_, 362 _bis_. Mary, ib.
    Philippa, ib. William 361 _bis_. Arms 361. Crest 365. Monuments at
    St. Earth 361
  ―――― of Burnewall, in Buryan, Christopher bought Noye’s title to the
    Lanow estate, but constrained to compromise with the Earl of Bath,
    pleaded his own cause to the admiration of the court, ii. 334
  ―――― of Canonteign, Devon, Thomas, iii. 269
  ―――― of St. Earth, Catherine, i. 376.――William, ii. 34.――John and
    his daughter, iii. 159. William 145, 159
  ―――― of Gear, i. 364
  Davis, Christopher, i. 141, 144 _bis_. Henry 144. John 292. Arms
    144.――Mr. and Dr. late of Plymouth, ii. 111. John 352.――Rev. John,
    iii. 351
  Davis’s British Lexicon, i. 120
  Davy, Sir Humphrey, i. 385――ii. 218――iii. 48, 94. Anecdote of 94.
    His life by Dr. Paris 95.――His grandfather, an architect, ii. 32.
    Rev. C. W. 270.――Family, iii. 48, 94
  ―――― of St. Cuthbert, Mr. and Mrs. and family, iii. 317
  Dawnay of Cowick, Yorksh., Sir John, and arms, iii. 438
  Dawney of Sheviock, Emelyn, i. 63, 64 _bis_. Sir John 63.――Emelyn,
    iii. 436, 437, 438. Henry 438. John 437. Sir John 436. Nicholas 437,
    438 _ter._, 439. William 437. Mr. built the church, and Mrs. the
    barn 439. Family 436 _bis_, 439. Arms 437
  Dawson, the Right Hon. G. R. iv. 143. J. R. Dean of St. Patrick’s,
    furnished the Editor with information 141, 143. Captain 31
  Day of Judgment, Latin prize poem upon, ii. 154
  ―――― John and Peter, i. 216.――Dorothy, iii. 145, 159. John 159. Rev.
    John of Little Petherick 334. Peter 145
  ―――― of Tresuggan, i. 225
  Daye, i. 298
  Dayman, Rev. Charles, i. 343――ii. 233
  ―――― of Flexbury, Rev. Charles, iii. 351. John 353. Family 351
  Dead, custom of saluting, i. 183
  Deadman Point, ii. 106, 113, 115. Its Geology 115
  Dean, rural, oath of, ii. 307
  ―――― General, and his death, ii. 26
  Deane’s Essay on Dracontia, i. 141
  Decumani, i. 234
  Deer park, ii. 402
  Deerso river, its source, iv. 237
  Defoe’s Tour through Great Britain, ii. 346
  Degembris manor, iii. 269
  Degemue in Kerrier, iii. 422 _bis_
  Delabole quarry, i. 118. Slate 343
  Delahay, i. 262
  De la Mare, Peter, iv. 28
  Delcoath, i. 128, 165 _bis_.
  Delian, St. history of, i. 382
  ―――― collegiate church, i. 328
  Dell, Rev. Henry, of Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 403, 405. Rev. John ditto 403
  Delphic oracle, iii. 162
  Delves, Sir Bryant Broughton, iii. 9
  Delyan, St. Landaff cathedral dedicated to, ii. 65
  Democracy vindicated, ii. 77
  Denham, Judge, iii. 144. Miss 191. Heir of the family 140
  Denham’s town, iii. 361
  Denis, Great and Little, i. 39
  ―――― St. i. 386, 392
  ―――― St. abbey, near Paris, ii. 169
  ―――― St. church, iii. 198
  DENIS, ST. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, land tax, patron, incumbent, i. 308. Saint’s history, ib.
    Church 309. Robert Dunkin, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 310
  Denmark, George Prince of, called George Drinkall, ii. 15
  Dennis family, ii. 313――iii. 23. Rev. Mr. 171
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 143. Edward 320. George, ib.
  ―――― of Orleigh, i. 171
  ―――― of Trembath, Alexander, his character, and Miss, iii. 33
  ―――― St. name explained, iv. 313
  ―――― chapel, iii. 453
  ―――― parish, i. 212, 227, 341――iii. 58, 180, 207, 391, 395, 402, 448
    _bis_, 450 _ter._, 453
  ―――― rectory, i. 72
  Dennis, St. vicarage, iii. 448, 451, 453
  ―――― in Branwell, iii. 202
  Dennithorne, Nicholas, ii. 402
  Densill, account of, iii. 147
  ―――― barrow, iii. 147
  ―――― Alice and John, iii. 133
  ―――― of Densill, Alice, and Anne, iii. 147. John 147 _bis_. Serjeant
    John ibid. Thomas, and family 147
  ―――― of Philley, Devon, Rich. iii. 148
  Derby, lofty tower at, iii. 363
  Despatch transport, lost returning from Spain, ii. 325
  Devereux, Robert, Earl of Essex, iv. 185
  Devil’s coyts, i. 220
  Devon county, i. 113, 168, 170, 327, 334, 342――ii. 19, 71 _bis_, 77,
    109, 110 _bis_, 115, 122, 137, 149, 177, 293, 340, 413, 415,
    417――iii. 56, 254 _bis_, 256, 279, 336――iv. 39 _bis_, 40 _bis_,
    125.――Part of, iii. 457.――Insurgents enter, i. 86.――Romantic scenery
    of, and dunstone prevalent in, ii. 88. Perkin Warbeck marched into
    188. Cornish rebels enter 195. Made prisoners in 197. Blessing
    proclaimed in all its churches for the builders of Bideford bridge,
    to which most families of note contributed 341. Donne’s map of 221.
    Granite in, iii. 432. Divided from Cornwall 104. Lord Clinton
    removed to 230. Werrington parish in 460.――Many gentlemen’s sons of,
    educated at Wike St. Mary, iv. 134. Charles 1st marched through 185
  ―――― bishops of, iii. 415
  ―――― member of parliament for, Sir T. D. Ackland, iii. 271
  ―――― sheriffs of, ii. 43, 130 _bis_, 196, 341 _bis_.――Thomas
    Arundell, iii. 141. John Cheyney 116.――William, John, and John de
    Cheyney, iv. 43.――James Chudleigh, ii. 189.――Sir John Damerell,
    iii. 60. Stephen Durneford 101, 141. Sir Peers, Peter, and Sir
    Rich. Edgecumbe 103. Sir Richard Edgecumbe 101, 103. Richard Hals
    and William Wadham 116
  ―――― Earl of, iii. 350, 438 _bis_――A faggot belonging to, ii.
    410.――Ordgar, iii. 384, 460; and Elphrida his Countess, iv.
    6.――Ordulf, iii. 385. Courtenay, Edward Hugh 10th, i. 63.――Edward
    11th, and Edward 12th, iii. 436.――Edward 12th, or the blind, Edward
    13th.――Edward 16th, i. 64.――Edward 16th, ii. 189.――William 17th,
    Edward 18th.――Thomas, i. 64――iii. 350 _bis_
  Devonport, i. 266
  Devynock, i. 172
  Dewen of Marazion, Alice, iii. 54
  Dewer, Captain, ii. 219
  Deweston, ii. 430
  Dewin, Mr. ii. 83
  De Witt’s engagement with Blake, ii. 25
  Deza, Donna Giovanna, i. 311
  Diamond, history of the Pitt, i. 68. Weight, drawing of it, worn by
    the Kings of France in their hat, stolen at the Revolution, but
    recovered, placed by Napoleon between the teeth of a crocodile in
    the handle of his sword 69
  Diana, shrine makers of, ii. 53
  Dictionnaire Historique, i. 111
  Dictionary, first Latin and English, written by Sir Thomas Elliot,
    ii. 66
  ―――― Holwell’s Mythological, Etymological and Historical, iii. 171
  Digby, Col. iv. 186. Lord, combat of his troop with Straughans ibid.
  Dilic, St. i. 2
  Dillington, Dorothy, iii. 346
  Dillon, Rev. Robert, ii. 123
  Dinah’s cave, iii. 282
  Dinam, Geoffrey de, ii. 415 _bis_
  Dinant, Oliver de, i. 168 _bis_, 170
  Dinas, Little, promontory and fortification, its siege, i. 40
  Dingle, Miss, iii. 65
  Dinham bridge, i. 168
  ―――― family, i. 349. Charles 170. John _quin._ and Josce 168. Lady
    Elizabeth 170. Galfred de 168. Jane Lady Zouch, Joan Lady Arundell
    and Elizabeth Lady FitzWarren 170 _bis_. Margaret Lady Carew 170 and
    171. Arms 170.――Lanhearn descended lineally from, iii.
    150.――William, iv. 45. Family 62
  ――――’s land, iii. 41
  Dinnavall quarry, iv. 45
  Dinsull, ii. 172
  Dioclesian, Emperor, i. 52. His fortune told by a Druid 192.――St.
    Alban martyred under, ii. 64
  Diodorus Siculus, ii. 4, 20
  Dion, ii. 162
  Diosma ericoides, iv. 183
  Diploma of D. C. L. from Oxford University, iii. 50
  Dirford castle, iv. 228
  Disne, Le, river, ii. 64
  D’Israeli, ii. 78. His Commentaries, his Eliot, Hampden, and Pym 78
  Dissenters, their contest with the establishment for Proselytism,
    ii. 133
  Divine Legation, iii. 69
  Divinity, James’s introduction to, iii. 155
  Dix, Rev. E. of Truro, iv. 92
  Dobbins, Mr. iii. 162
  Doble, John, iii. 185
  Dock, iv. 33
  Doddridge’s History, iii. 28.――Of the Duchy of Cornwall, ii.
    404.――Of Wales and Cornwall, (Sir John,) iv. 8
  Dodman point, ii. 330
  Dodson, Robert, iii. 358.――Family, i. 221
  ―――― of Hay, i. 411. Arms 412
  ―――― of London, i. 412
  Dogherty family, ii. 362
  Doidge, Rev. Mr. of Tallant, iv. 23
  Dolben, Mr. iii. 17.――Mr. Justice, appointed to Cornwall, his
    administration of the law a happiness to the county, ii. 52.
    Petition to Charles II. against him 53. His name struck off the
    commission 54
  Dole abbey, in Franche Comté, iii. 281
  ―――― Sampson, Archbishop of, iii. 336
  Dolichos lignosus, iv. 181
  Domesday, ii. 379
  ―――― Book, ii. 51, 70, 169, 175, 259, 299, 315, 319, 384――iii. 22,
    27, 44, 46, 64, 74, 78, 101, 110, 111, 114, 117, 118, 124, 127, 139,
    143, 161, 163, 169, 175, 182, 190, 195, 196, 198, 237, 261, 276, 291
    _bis_, 345, 349, 352, 365, 391, 393, 400, 402, 421, 422, 441, 451,
    456, 461――iv. 1, 6, 12, 15, 19, 20, 39, 43, 48, 50, 52, 61, 63, 66,
    67, 68, 70, 81, 93 _bis_, 94, 96, 99, 102, 110, 115, 117, 118 _bis_,
    124, 128, 137, 139, 153, 155, 160, 161
  Domesday Roll, ii. 48, 62, 86, 92, 94, 106, 151, 155, 226, 253,
    320――iv. 184
  ―――― Survey, iv. 62, 93
  ―――― Tax, ii. 36, 50, 59, 80, 129, 141, 145, 229, 232, 251, 257,
    273, 275, 291, 315, 332, 335, 340
  Dominica, St. i. 315
  Dominican abbey, Dublin, iv. 147
  ―――― chapel and friary at Truro, iv. 73
  ―――― friars, iv. 73. Walter de Exeter said to be one 111
  Dominicans, i. 176, 312. _See Friars_
  Dominick, St. i. 175 _bis_. De Gusman 310, 315. His history 311
  ―――― St. parish, i. 151, 153――ii. 309, 364, 375――iii. 161, 167, 345
  DOMINICK, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, saint’s
    history, i. 311. Dominican friars 312. Halton ibid. By Tonkin,
    Crockaddon 313. Pentilly 314. Halton, the Saint, a Female 315. By
    the Editor, Francis Rous, Charles Fitz-Geoffrey, Sir James Tillie
    315. New mansion at Pentilly, statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 316
  Domitian, i. 198――iv. 165, 167
  Doncaster, John, ii. 189
  Doniert, i. 178, 179 _bis_, 180 _ter._, 182 _bis_, 195 _ter._
  Donne, Benjamin, ii. 221
  ――――’s Map of Devonshire, ii. 221
  Donneny manor, iv. 127
  Donnithorne, i. 8
  Dorchester, St. Berimus, Bishop of, ii. 60
  ―――― Oxon, i. 407
  Dorset, i. 334
  ―――― county, H. Bankes, M.P. for, iii. 221
  ―――― Thomas Grey, Duke of, iii. 294
  ―――― Thomas Grey, Marquis of, iii. 350
  Dosmeny pool, i. 178, 189.――By Leland, iv. 285
  Dotson of Roskymer, Henry, iii. 324 _bis_, 325. John 325 _bis_
  Douay college, iii. 143 _bis_
  Dovenot, i. 168
  Dover castle, ii. 10
  ―――― town, ii. 10, 76――iii. 10.――A cinque port, ii. 38. Enlarged and
    made a packet station 45.――Change of its name, iii. 29. High water
    at 98
  Dower park, account of, ii. 336
  Doweringe, Rev. Mr. ii. 291
  Down hills, ii. 121
  Downes, Rev. Mr. i. 129.――Mr. ii. 119, 120 _quat._
  Downevet borough, ii. 420
  Dozmere, account of, and stories relating to, iii. 265. Etymology 266
  Dracæna australis, iv. 181
  Dracontia, Essay on, i. 141
  Drake, Sir Francis, i. 315――ii. 21――iii. 460――iv. 86.――John, ii.
    195.――Z. H. iii. 256
  ――――’s island, iii. 108
  Dranna point, ii. 331
  Draper, i. 283
  Drayns, East, manor of, in St. Neot and St. Cleere, iii. 359
  Drayton’s Polyolbion, App. 8, iv. 293 to 308, and notes from 308 to 311
  Drew, Mr. iv. 34.――Miss, i. 39
  ――――’s Teignton, Devon, ii. 98
  Drift, account of, iii. 427
  Drillavale quarry, iv. 45
  Drineck, ii. 260
  Drinking at St. Colomb, i. 219
  Drinkwater, Rev. Mr. i. 398
  Drogo, iii. 33
  Druid, female, prophesies Dioclesian’s elevation to the throne, i. 192
  Druidical antiquities of the Scilly islands, iv. 175
  ―――― basons, i. 185, 186 _bis_, 187, 190. A very large one 191
  ―――― learning, iii. 52
  ―――― monument, i. 196
  ―――― residence, fine site for, i. 192
  Druids, i. 183――iii. 49, 290, 385.――Etymology and account of, i. 192
  Druis, Celtic, i. 192
  Drummond, Lady, i. 313.――Sir Adam and his daughter, iii. 201. Sir
    William 200.――Sir William and his two daughters, iv. 156
  Drus, British and Greek, i. 192
  Dry tree, iii. 127, 138
  Dublin, i. 295 _ter._――iv. 146
  ―――― cathedral, iv. 143 _bis_. Archbishops of 146. Michael de
    Tregury, Archbishop of 138. Taken prisoner at sea 146. Few records
    of the prelates and dignitaries 144
  ―――― city and diocese, iv. 146
  ―――― St. Patrick’s church at, iv. 138, 146
  Dubritius, St. Bishop of Landaff, i. 382
  Du Cange, ii. 369.――His Glossary, iii. 389
  Duchy Exchequer, iv. 99. Leonard Lovice, receiver general 41
  ―――― officers, negotiation of Helston with, ii. 164
  Duckenfield, Captain, monument to, ii. 325
  Duckworth, Admiral, iii. 440
  Duddowe, i. 243
  Dugdale, ii. 163, 344――iii. 111, 441――iv. 101.――His Baronage, ii.
    91――iii. 27.――His Monasticon Anglicanum, i. 217, 300――ii. 62, 96,
    208――iii. 78, 232, 332, 372, 446――iv. 6, 26, 100, 105.――His short
    view, &c. iii. 26. His Warwickshire 317
  Dukas’s account of the Paleologi, ii. 368
  Dulo parish, ii. 298, 391, 394.――Road to Hessenford from, iv. 30. Or
    Duloe, ii. 397――iii. 245, 253, 291, 302, 347
  DULO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient state,
    value of benefice, i. 316. Patrons, incumbent, landtax, rector,
    story of a Rev. Mr. Forbes, new vicarage house 317. Death of Rev.
    Mr. Fincher, council against lay impropriation, Trewergy 318.
    Tremada, Westnorth 319. Trenant, Trewenn 320. By Tonkin, value of
    benefice, Trenant, ib. By Editor, etymology from Archbishop Usher,
    and Bond’s Sketches of East and West Looe, history of St.
    Theliaus, Treworgy, Trenant 321. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 322
  Dundagell castle, i. 328, 329, 330 _bis_, 332. Account of 323
  ―――― manor, i. 322――iv. 43
  ―――― parish, i. 372, 404――ii. 259――iii. 81――iv. 20, 42, 66, 94
  ―――― Robert de, i. 323
  DUNDAGELL or TINTAGELL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, manor, ancient name, i. 322. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, landtax, market, fair, Trebennen, borough arms, court
    leet, representatives, family of Dundagell, castle 323.
    Consecrated well and chapel, Pendew, Porth Horne, rock arch over
    the sea 324. Lines on the castle, and on King Arthur 325. Arthur’s
    history, King Uter’s surname and arms, his victories 326. Love for
    Igerne 327. Merlin procures him admittance to her 330. Marries
    her, his death 332. Merlin’s prophecy of Arthur 333. Arthur’s
    victories over the Saxons 334, and Romans 335. Round Table, his
    arms 336. Death, and discovery of his tomb 337. Edward Third’s
    Knights of the Round Table 339. By Editor, remarks on Arthur and
    the castle 340. Impropriation of benefice, two other chapels 341.
    Print of Arthur by Caxton, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase. Kneighton’s Kieve 343
  Dundee, ii. 66
  Dunecheine, name for Dundagell, i. 322, 324
  Dunechine, i. 342
  Dungarvon, fishing nets introduced from, ii. 264
  Dungeness, sea fight before, iii. 26
  Dungerth, i. 182 _ter._ His monument 179 _bis_, 184 _ter._, 195.
    Inscription of 180. Vault under it 181. Inscription 180, 182
  Dunheved church, iii. 458
  Dunhevet castle, ii. 417, 427
  ―――― town 417. Inhabitants drawn to Launceston 418
  Dunkin, Robert, i. 310――iii. 83
  Dunkirk, ii. 55――iv. 157
  Dunmeer, i. 368
  Dunscombe, Mr. iii. 125
  Dunstan, St. iii. 415.――Wished to make St. Udith Queen, iv. 94
  ―――― St. parish, London, iii. 251
  Dunstanvill, i. 36
  Dunstanville barons from Henry I. to Henry III. ii. 249. Barony
    conferred 249
  ―――― Reginald de, ii. 239.――Earl of Cornwall, iv. 169.――Family, ii. 239
  ―――― Lord de, i. 114, 137, 164.――ii. 23――iii. 239, 353, 386――iv.
    107, 136, 154.――Godrevy, his property, ii. 150. Memoir of 243.
    Joined Lord North’s party 245. Headed the Cornish miners in
    defence of Plymouth, and created a baronet 246. French revolution
    247. Created a peer, his connexion with the Plantagenets, and
    private character 249. Marriages and issue 250.――His marriage,
    iii. 230. His death, and public monument 389.――His edition of
    Carew, i. 241, 258, 341――ii. 45, 109, 120, 294, 394 _bis_, 398,
    409, 419――iii. 28, 39, 79, 81, 91, 102, 150, 171, 179, 279, 287,
    302, 388, 393――iv. 132
  Dunster, Reginald de Mohun, Lord of, iii. 293
  Dunstone prevalent in Cornwall and Devon, ii. 88
  ―――― rock, iii. 256.――Rocks, ii. 234
  Dunveth, i. 117
  Duporth, iv. 104
  Durant, family, iii. 270.――Family and heir, iv. 16
  Dureford, monastery at, iii. 206
  Durham county, i. 183, 289, 290
  ―――― bishops of, Ralph Flambard, and William Carilepho, i. 290
  ―――― bishopric, transferred from Lindisfarne, i. 290. Immunities
    curtailed and restored 291. Arms of 291
  Durneford family, iii. 107
  ―――― of Devon, Stephen and Miss, iii. 101, 102. Family 101
  ―――― of Stonehouse, i. 347
  Durnford, Stephen, iii. 374
  Dutch fleet, engagements of with English, ii. 25, 26, 28
  ―――― man of war, a fight with, ii. 41
  ―――― ships driven into Falmouth harbour, ii. 6
  ―――― squadron, iii. 287
  ―――― war, ii. 27, 28, 42, 94, 267.――Wars, iii. 186
  Duvaura dependens, iv. 181
  ―――― undulata, iv. 181
  Duverdier’s History of the Swiss Cantons, iii. 186
  Dye, St. history of, ii. 131, 133
  ―――― chapel of, ii. 131, 133
  ―――― town of, ii. 131
  Dynas castle, iv. 228
  Dynham family, i. 167, 168 _ter._ John 169 _bis_. Lord 170.――Galfrid
    de, iv. 156

  Eadbald, King of Kent, iii. 281
  Eadnothus, bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  ―――― brother of Alpsius, Duke of Devon and Cornwall, ii. 420
  ―――― Bishop of Devon, iii. 415, 416
  Eagle vicarage, ii. 363
  ―――― white, Cornish for, i. 120
  Earle, Mr. i. 296
  EARME, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquity,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, saint’s history, i.
    393. Tregaza, Godolphin blowing house 394. The cat eating the
    dolphin 395. Truthan, Treworgan, Treworgan Vean, Innis 396. Trehane
    397. By Tonkin, Cargaul, Jago family 397. Killigrew 398. Ennis,
    Polglace 399. Trevillon 400. By Editor, advowson, Mr. Wynne
    Pendarves 400. Polsew 402. Treworgan, Truthan, Killigrew, statistics
    403. Geology by Dr. Boase 404
  Earth, St. bridge, i. 360
  ―――― St. church, i. 345, 377
  ―――― parish, ii. 169――iii. 5, 46, 125
  EARTH, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land-tax,
    Trewinard, i. 344. Arrest of a member of parliament, murder by Mr.
    Trewinard 345. Fatal duel 346. Other murders by gentlemen,
    Trenhayle 347. Trelizike 348. Gurlyn 349. By Tonkin, name,
    Trewinard 349. Trelisick 350. By the Editor, name, church,
    monuments in it 351. Vicars 353. Curious story of Mr. Symonds 354.
    Glebe, vicarage house, churchyard, bridge widened by the Editor,
    adjoining parishes 355. Trewinnard 356. Improved by Mr. Hawkins,
    artificially supplied with a stream of water 358. Trelisick 359.
    Tredrea, Bosence, Roman intrenchments 360. Monuments of the Davies
    family 361. Perthcolumb Gear, Tregethes, copper mill at Trewinnard
    364. Genlyn, Treloweth, tin smelting house there, Lamb tin 365.
    Statistics, feast, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, school 366
  East Angles, Sigebert King of, ii. 284
  East, hundred, i. 151, 153, 377――ii. 226, 229, 250, 361, 363, 364,
    377, 417――iii. 1, 37, 40, 41, 43, 101, 161, 167, 335, 345, 371, 374,
    436, 437 _bis_, 456, 457, 461――iv. 6, 7, 50, 59 _bis_, 63 _bis_, 68,
    69, 376
  ―――― India Company, ii. 227
  ―――― Indies, ii. 100
  ―――― Saxons, Sebert King of, ii. 284
  ―――― St. pool, ii. 281
  Eastbourne, Sussex, iii. 33
  Eastcot village, iii. 255
  Eastwellshire hundred, i. 310, 409――ii. 59, 309.――Etymology, i. 32
  Eata, St. bishop of Lindisfarne or Hexham, history of his see, iv.
    42. His death 43
  Eath, St. parish, ii. 332
  Eaton, Rev. D. iii. 463, 464
  Ebbingford, Thomas de Waunford, Lord of, iv. 13
  ―――― or Efford manor, account of, iv. 16. By Leland 258
  Ebchester, i. 183
  Ebiorite heresy, iii. 59
  Ecclesiastical courts, iii. 155
  Ecclesis Gwenwan, i. 321
  Echard, ii. 78
  Echium grandiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― nervosum, iv. 182
  Eddystone lighthouse, its situation, iii. 375. History of the first
    376. Of the second, fire, accident from the burning lead 377.
    History and description of the present 378
  ―――― rocks, iii. 376
  Edeston island, iv. 238
  Edgar, King, iv. 93, 97
  Edgecombe of Cuttvyle, Sir Pierce, and Hon. Richard, iii. 374.
    Family 375
  Edgecumbe, Hon. Richard, i. 417. Sir Richard 153, 154, 417, 418.
    William 154.――Peter, ii. 189. Peter sheriff of Devon 235. Sir Peter
    187. Sir Richard 100, 108 _bis_, 115 _bis_, 187. Sir Henry
    Bodrigan’s defence against 115.――Hon. Richard, iii. 374. Sir Richard
    394. Roger 358. Miss 199. Mr. 107.――Hon. Richard, iv. 75.――Family,
    i. 154 _ter._, 157, 421――ii. 362, 393――iii. 190 _bis_, 203――iv. 71,
    136 _bis_, 143, 158. Arms 72
  ―――― of Bodrigan, Richard, ii. 114
  ―――― of Mount Edgecumbe, Sir Richard, ii. 114.――Sir Peers, iii. 102,
    103. Peter 101, 103 _bis_, 104. Sir Peter 104. Sir Piers Lord of
    Cotehele and of East Stonehouse 101. Richard, Richard, Richard,
    Richard 104. Sir Richard 102, 103, 104. Sir Richard favoured Henry
    the 7th’s pretensions 101. His narrow escape and subsequent reward
    102. Built a chapel and was sheriff 103. His struggle with Bodrigan
    for plunder 204. On the winning side at Bosworth 204. Family 101,
    194. History in Carew 104. Arms 103
  Edinburgh, iii. 94
  Editha, St. her early death, self denial, legend of, her mother
    Abbess of Wilton, iv. 96
  Editor, ii. 83, 99, 100. A descendant and heir at law of
    Attorney-general Noye 339. M.P. for Helston 160, 164. On poor law
    committee 159. Remembers an English fleet of 40 sail pursued up the
    Channel by an enemy of nearly double 247. Remembers a cloister at
    St. Bennet’s 387. Has seen an original receipt of a fine for
    non-attendance at the Coronation of James I. 269. Has heard
    traditionary accounts of the plague 271. Is indebted to the Rev. J.
    Smythe for admission to Pembroke College 287. Character he has heard
    of Mr. Knile 267. Mr. K.’s monument stands on his land 268. His
    remembrance of Mr. Pitt 154. His memoir of and friendship for Lord
    de Dunstanville 243, and feelings in writing of him 249. His
    inquiries on the subject of the vessel driven from Charlestown to
    St. Ives 268. His remarks on the superstition, monastic
    institutions, and devastations of the 16th century 425.――The
    heir of Humphrey Noye, iii. 151. His education 96. His age 273. His
    connexion with Sir Humphrey Davy 94. Introduced him to Dr. Beddoes
    251. Raised a subscription for replacing the rocks at Trereen Dinas,
    and Lanyon Cromlech 32. Has printed Keigwin’s translations 288.
    Remembers Sarah Coat, who lived to the age of a hundred and four
    460. Possesses the manor of Lamellin 20. An old receipt 6. A MS. of
    Noye’s 154, and his picture of which he has presented a copy to
    Exeter College 156. Has also the marriage contract of Humphrey Noye
    ibid. and a letter of Mr. J. Trevanion’s 204. Found the form of oath
    for rural deans 307. His visit to Mr. Walker 4. His remarks upon Dr.
    Borlase 49. Upon the Book of Job 69, and on Hugh Peters 71. His
    character of Penzance corporation 92. Remarks on the method of
    making signals 106. On Plymouth breakwater 108. On monasticism,
    popish mummeries 122, 262, 301, 332, 399, 401. On the succession of
    animal and vegetable life 174. On the motives of civil wars 203. On
    etymologies 206. On representation 272. On old age 273. On the
    Lionesse country 331. On Elizabeth’s laws against papists, and on
    the reigns of the Tudors 370. On the purchase of advowsons by a
    society 400. On Hals’s specimen of Homer 420. His character and
    biography of Mr. Whitaker 406.――Possesses a manor in Towednack
    parish, iv. 54. Purchased Trereen Dinas 166. His remarks on the
    alteration of ancient gothic churches, and its cause 103.――His
    mother and residence, i. 360.――His grandfather, ii. 34. And
    great-grandfather 146, 160
  Edles in Kenwen, iv. 73
  ―――― manor, ii. 315. Account of ibid.
  Edmonds, Everard, iv. 77
  Edmondsbury, St. i. 338
  Edmund Earl of Cornwall, iv. 4 _bis_
  ―――― Ironside, i. 211
  ―――― saint and king, i. 407 _bis_
  ――――’s, St. chapel, iii. 317, 318
  Edmunds, Henry, ii. 30
  Edulphus bishop of Exeter, ii. 7
  Edward the elder, king, i. 407――iii. 1, 416
  ―――― the martyr, king, his death, iv. 94
  ―――― the confessor, king, i. 25――ii. 38, 61, 73, 174, 177, 205
    _bis_, 208, 214――iii. 130, 365, 416. Saint 363――iv. 155.――Built St.
    Michael’s church, ii. 202. His charter to it 208. Translated 209.
    Placed a priory of benedictine monks there 208
  Edward 1st, king, ii. 38, 89, 155, 313, iii. 361 _bis_, 384, 394,
    409, 412, 414, _bis_, 15, 26, 44, 56 _bis_, 101, 111, 112, 116, 129,
    132, 165, 214, 230, 245, 254, 257, 261, 277, 284, 291 _bis_, 334,
    336, 339, 345, 347, 349, 352, 354, 372, 374 _bis_, 384, 389, 396,
    398, 403, 405 _bis_, 437, 438, 442, 449, 457――iv. 7, 15 _bis_, 23,
    24, 43 _bis_, 44, 62, 66, 67, 76, 83, 84, 95, 96 _bis_, 102, 112
    _bis_, 118, 119, 128, 129, 139, 140, 153 _bis_, 157 _bis_, 162
    _bis_.――Frequented Helston, ii. 156
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 6, 38, 363, 409, 410――iii. 26, 129, 165, 211, 316, 405
    _ter._――iv. 3, 96
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 4, 6, 38 _bis_, 45, 120, 146, 155, 176, 177, 209, 302,
    316, 336, 341, 409――iii. 15, 27, 56, 60, 65, 79, 115, 129, 130, 133
    _bis_, 140, 199, 200, 212, 270, 316, 323, 372, 381, 405――iv. 6
    _bis_, 8, 13, 21 _bis_, 43, 101, 103, 139, 156, 171
  ―――― 4th, ii. 108 _bis_, 182 _quin._, 183, 185, 186, 188, 191, 209,
    251, 254, 260, 341 _bis_――iii. 116, 141, 147, 168, 211, 247, 270,
    274――iv. 13, 22 _bis_, 43 _bis_, 161.――His commission to punish the
    Foy pirates, ii. 41
  ―――― 6th, ii. 72, 196, 197, 198, 326, 335, 386, 404, 414――iii. 170,
    208, 268――iv. 135
  ―――― the Black Prince, iii. 27――iv. 4, 8. The first duke of
    Cornwall, won his plume at Cressy 72
  Edwards, John, i. 364, 365.――John, iii. 342. Notice of 340. Joseph
    341. Mr. 196. Family, curious tenure of 178
  Edwardsia grandiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― microphylla, iv. 182
  Edwyn, King of Northumbria, iii. 284. His death ibid.
  Efford, iii. 270.――Near Stratton, ii. 184.――Sir J. Arundell removed
    from, iii. 274
  Egbert, King, iii. 322
  Egbright, the 13th King of England or the West Saxons, ii. 310.――His
    victory, iv. 6
  Egerton, Lord, ii. 9
  Egeus, Pro-consul of Rome in Achaia, commanded the crucifixion of
    St. Andrew, iv. 101
  Egid, St. ii. 430
  Eglesderry in Kerrier, iii. 442 _ter._
  Egleshale parish, ii. 340
  Egleshayle church, i. 75, 372. Tower 374
  ―――― of Egleshayle, Matthew, and arms, i. 374
  ―――― parish, i. 234, 351, 372――ii. 151, 332――iii. 64, 74, 237.
    Living of 301
  EGLESHAYLE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, patron, incumbent, rector, value of benefice, land tax,
    founder, park, i. 367. Peverell’s crosses, Prior’s cross, Cornish
    proverb, Pencarrow 368. Camp in Pencarrow-park 369. Kestell 370.
    Rudavy Croan 371. Epitaph, Tregleah castle, Killy Biry, Ward bridge
    372. Piers laid on woolpacks 373. Church tower built 374. By Tonkin,
    Pencarrow ibid. Padstow harbour, Croan 376. By the Editor, Wade
    bridge, Pendavy 376. Crowan, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, vicar 377
  ―――― Thomas Longbound, vicar of, i. 373. Vicarage 130
  EGLESKERRY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, i. 377.
    Impropriation, ancient state, manor of Penheale, mathematical school
    at Looe 378. Trelynike 379. By Tonkin, saint, small-pox ibid. By
    Editor, proprietors of Penheale 380. Statistics, vicar, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 381
  Egles Merthyr barton, iii. 180. Tenement 209
  Eglesros or Egles Ross parish, ii. 275――iii. 402
  Eglos Crock church, ii. 256
  Egloskerry parish, i. 197, 381――ii. 377, 399, 430――iii. 38, 457,
    461――iv. 50, 51, 59, 60 _quat._, 63 _bis_, 64, 68, 69
  Egypt, iii. 187.――The Saracens in possession of, ii. 37. Deserts of 279
  Eldon, Lord Chancellor, iii. 253, 290, 351
  Eleanor, Queen, i. 339
  Eledred, St. i. 200
  Elementa Logicæ, ii. 33
  Elerchy manor, ii. 50――iii. 404――iv. 116 _bis_. House 118, 121
  Elerci, several places in Gallia so called, iv. 116
  Elercky parish, iv. 116, 118 _quater._ Etymology 118
  Elerky and Ruan Lanyhorne in Ruan and St. Veryan, ii. 359.――Manors,
    iii. 406
  ―――― mills, iv. 119
  Elford, Miss, iii. 66.――Family, i. 347, 387――ii. 293, 427
  ―――― of Roach and St. Dennis, iv. 161 _bis_
  Eliot, Mr. i. 321.――Edward Craggs, ii. 75. Rev. John 354. Sir John
    77 _quin._, 78 _quat._ Richard 75. Sir Richard 71. Sir Thomas 66,
    71. Walter 71. Lord 78, 86. Family 66, 252. Its origin 66.――John,
    and Sir John the celebrated patriot, iii. 39, 337. Rev. Robert,
    fifty years rector of Pillaton 346.――Family, iv. 12, 127
  ―――― of Berks, ii. 66
  ―――― of Cambridgeshire, ii. 66
  ―――― of Devon, ii. 66
  ―――― of Port Eliot, John, i. 379.――Daniel, ii. 71. Edward 70, 71,
    72, 77. John 71. Sir John 66, 70, 71 _bis_. Katharine and Nicholas
    71. Richard 70 _bis_, 71.――Lord Eliot, iii. 39. William his son 39, 337
  Elizabeth, popular abbreviation of, iv. 120
  ―――― daughter of King Edward 1st, i. 63
  ―――― Queen, i. 344――ii. 6, 7 _bis_, 44 _bis_, 56, 66, 68, 69 _bis_,
    213, 215, 227, 233, 293, 314, 341 _bis_, 342, 344, 414――iii. 8, 16,
    20, 67, 103 _bis_, 104, 105, 119, 134, 199 _bis_, 212, 234, 242,
    287, 293, 294, 311, 317 _bis_, 318, 325 _quater_, 357, 358 _bis_,
    360, 369, 370, 445, 463 _bis_――iv. 20, 41, 107, 172. Gave a charter
    to Truro 73
  ―――― Princess, iii. 27
  Ellery of St. Colomb Major, marshal of Lydford castle, iii. 184
  Ellett, i. 274. John 272
  Elliot, ii. 232
  Elliott, Mrs. sister of Ralph Allen, Esq. i. 58. Rev. St. John
    12.――Miss, ii. 33.――Miss, niece of Mr. Allen of Bath, iv. 89
  Ellis, George, i. 271, 275.――John, iii. 429. Pascoe 83. Arms 429,
    432. Family monuments 432
  ―――― of Bray, John, ii. 282
  ―――― of Tregethes, i. 364
  Elmsworthy, account of, ii. 347
  Elphrida, Countess of Devon, iv. 6
  Elvan courses, i. 159――iv. 5
  Ely, Francis Turner, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Emelianus, i. 197
  Emendationes in Suidam, ii. 265
  Enador parish, iii. 267
  Enchanted Lovers, a pastoral, iv. 97
  Endelient, i. 1
  Endellion or St. Endellyan parish, ii. 332, 340――iii. 179, 237,
    241――iv. 44, 47
  Eneas, i. 153
  ENEDELLYAN, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity,
    stunt, his history, i. 382. Value of benefice, Roscurok, Trefreke,
    Tresongar, Pennant, Cheny 383. By Tonkin, Roscarrake, Trefreke 384.
    By Editor, Port Isaac, church, rectory, and prebends 384. Church,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 385
  Enedor, St. parish, i. 209, 212――ii. 353, 355, 356――iv. 20, 140
  Enedor-Bosithney borough, iii. 81
  England, ii. 373, 407――iii. 450――iv. 172.――Miserable state of, ii.
    375. French invasion of 40. Peace of France and Holland with 43.
    Tobacco sold cheap in 43. St. Mellitus preached in 288. Some
    Paleologi may still be living in 369. Theodore’s settlement in 370,
    372, 373. Duke of Bracciano came to 371. Greek language fashionable
    in 373.――its water communication interrupted by chalk hills, iii.
    10. First impropriation of benefices in 114. St. Sennan, the most
    westerly point in 431.――Copyholds in, iv. 54. Lands in, given to
    foreign monasteries 99. Wars between France and 144. St. Dunstan
    wished to make St. Udith queen of 94
  ―――― crown of, iv. 145
  ―――― King of, ii. 146――iv. 7
  ―――― kings of, ii. 259, 422――iii. 168, 442――iv. 6.――Their eldest son
    to be Duke of Cornwall for ever, ii. 422.――Arms, iv. 71
  ―――― and France, Perkin Warbeck proclaimed King of, ii. 188
  English channel, ii. 358, 398, 409
  ―――― crown, iii. 451, 452
  ―――― Etymological Dictionary, iii. 148
  ―――― fleet encounters the Dutch, ii. 25. Refuses quarter, and
    defeats the enemy 26. Forced into Falmouth harbour ibid. Dismissed
    without pay 29. Detained at home 246. Cruizing while combined fleets
    were in Falmouth sound 246
  English language, iv. 126. Life of Guy, Earl of Warwick, in old 113
  ―――― men, iv. 99. On one side of Tamar 40. Fought against the Turks,
    ii. 371
  ―――― romance, ii. 214
  ―――― squadron captured Cadiz, iii. 287
  ―――― wars, iv. 75
  Enmour, island of, iv. 171
  Ennis, account of, i. 399――ii. 218
  Enny, St. chapel, and probably well, iii. 426
  Ennys, Samuel, iii. 327
  Enodoc, St. iii. 240
  Enodor, St. iii. 268
  ―――― parish, i. 160――ii. 270
  ENODOR, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, saint, his advice to
    Augustus, Carvinike, i. 386. Pencoll, Gourounsan, Trewheler,
    flatness of the country, fall of the church tower, mines, two rivers
    387. By Tonkin, hundred, history of St. Athenodorus, Summercourt,
    Penhele, and Fraddon villages, fairs, Michel village 388. Members of
    parliament, borough system, Reform Bill 389. Illustrious
    representatives of Michell, right of voting 390. Reform election,
    Pencoose, Trewhele, Treweere 391. Gomronson, Boswallow, Michell
    manor, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 392
  Ensham, abbot of, i. 233
  Ensleigh cottage, i. 26
  Entrenchment, Roman, at Bosence, i. 360
  Eny water, ii. 427 _bis_
  Enys, ii. 93
  ―――― John, ii. 97. Samuel 31, 97, 100, 317. Family and etymology of
    name, by Tonkin 97
  ―――― of Enys, John, ii. 93, 243. J. S. 57, 99, 243. Built a new
    house at Enys 100.――Mr. and his character, iii. 38. Family 332
  Ephesus, ii. 53
  Epigrams, Greek, anthology of, iv. 87
  Epimachus, St. ii. 81
  Epitaph of Richard Carew of Anthony, with observations upon it,
    Appendix XIV. iv. 378
  Ercedekne, Sir John l’, iii. 373
  Ercildowne, Thomas of, ii. 308
  Ergan, St. i. 351
  Erica ciliaris, iii. 230
  ―――― vagans, iii. 173, 260――iv. 180
  ―――― A multiflora, grows on all the uncultivated serpentine rock in
    Cornwall, ii. 331
  Ericornus fragrans, iv. 182
  ―――― punctata, iv. 181
  Eriobotrya japonica, iv. 182
  Eriocephalus africanus, iv. 182
  Erisey barton, iii. 416.――Account of, ii. 116
  ―――― Miss, i. 305.――Richard, ii. 6. Family 116, 117, 170, and arms
    116.――De, George, iii. 417. James 419. Richard 383. Richard, story
    of 417. Miss 135, 417. Mr. anecdote of 418. Family 258, 416, 419.
    Arms 419
  ―――― of Brickleigh, Devon, James, iii. 417
  ―――― of Trethewoll, James, i. 408
  Erisy, i. 125, 136 _bis_
  Erme, St. church, i. 402.――Monument to Dr. Cardew in, iv. 85
  ―――― St. parish, i. 207――ii. 2, 93, 146, 353, 355, 356――iii. 354
  ERNEY, ST. parish, part of Landrake, church still existing, Hals’s
    MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, etymology, Eagle
    vicarage, Lincolnshire, a daughter to Landrake. By Editor, Trelugan
    manor, Markwell, church entitled to service only once a month, ii.
    363. Statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 364
  Erroll, James Carr, Earl of, iii. 172
  Erth, St. parish, i. 261, 417――ii. 80, 99, 100, 225.――By Leland, iv.
    267――The vicar’s sister, iii. 310
  Ervan, St. church, i. 74
  ―――― St. parish, i. 409――ii. 256――iii. 334, 335
  ERVAN, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, i. 404.
    Trenbleigh, discovery of a sepulchral urn there, Treranall 405. By
    Tonkin, Treravall, Trenowith 406. By Editor, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 406
  Ervyn, St. parish, i. 407――iii. 175, 179
  Escallonia rubra, iv. 182
  ―――― montividiensis, iv. 182
  Escott, Thomas, iv. 37
  Escudifer, a French family, i. 210
  Ess family, ii. 153
  Esse, Radolpho de, ii. 119
  Essex county, Henry Marney, sheriff of, iii. 65
  ―――― Earl of, i. 113 _ter._, 114.――The parliamentary general, ii.
    277――iii. 20, 42, 73, 184――iv. 75.――Lord, ii. 411. Marched to
    relieve Plymouth, then into Cornwall, iv. 185. Hemmed in by the
    king’s troops, and obliged to retire alone 187. Followed by his
    principal officers 188. His army 186
  Est Low, by Leland, iv. 279
  Establishment, church, its contest with dissenters for proselytism,
    ii. 133
  Estcot, Richard, ii. 423
  Estwaye, ii. 429
  Ethelbert, King of Kent, ii. 284――iii. 284 _bis_
  ―――― 2nd, King, i. 407
  Ethelburga, Queen of Northumbria, iii. 284 _bis_
  Ethelfleda, wife of Earl Alric, iii. 263
  Ethelfred, King of Northumberland, ii. 284
  Ethelgar, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Ethelnodus, Archbishop, iv. 96
  Ethelred, King, iii. 384――iv. 94
  ―――― 2nd, King, ii. 61
  ―――― King of the Mercians, history of, i. 200 _bis_
  ―――― King of the West Saxons, i. 240. Buried at Wimborne 200
  Ethelwin, St. Bishop of, i. 290
  Ethelwold, Bishop, reproved St. Udith, iv. 93
  Ethelwulf, i. 240
  Ethy, iv. 158
  Eton college, ii. 149. First provost of, iii. 255
  ―――― school, character of, ii. 243, 244
  Eubates, i. 192
  Eure river, Yorkshire, iv. 79
  Eurex in Normandy, iv. 116
  Europe, iii. 310. Tour of 87
  Eury, St. ii. 272
  Eusebius, his Chronicle, iv. 148
  Evall, St. parish, i. 143, 404――iii. 139, 161, 175, 335
  EVALL, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land tax, saint, i.
    407. Trethewoll 408. By Editor, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 409
  Evans of Landrini in Wales, iii. 187
  Eve, i. 409
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 309, 315――iii. 43, 195
  EVE, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient state, manor of
    Trebighe, knights hospitalers, i. 410. Trebigh 411. By Tonkin, Hay,
    name of parish, Trebigh, Bickton. By Editor, saint, church 412.
    Patron, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 413
  Eve’s enchantment, ii. 102
  Every, Rev. Nicholas of St. Veep, iv. 114. His death 115
  Evyland manor, ii. 197
  Ewald, St. son of Ethelbert the 2nd, his history, i. 407
  Ewan, St. parish, iii. 18
  Ewe, St. manor, i. 418
  ―――― parish, ii. 105, 115――iii. 198, 202, 207, 451――iv. 117
  EWE, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, i. 413. Patron, incumbent, land tax, name, saint,
    murder of St. Hugh by the Jews, consequent persecution of that
    people 414. Lanhadarn 415. Tregonan, Halliggon, Trevithick 416.
    Treluick, by Tonkin, patron, Pelsew, Trelisick, Precays 417.
    Tregonan, Treworick, St. Ewe manor, Lanewa 418. Heligon, Coran,
    Lanhedrar, Lower Lanhedrar, Trelean, Rosecorla, Trelewick, Tregian,
    Pensiquillis, Lithony, Borew 420. Tregenno, Levalra, Penstruan,
    church 421. Monuments, gentry removed, Tremayne family 422.
    Statistics 423. Rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 424
  Ewny parish, ii. 258 _bis_, 284
  ―――― St. chapel, ii. 284
  Ewyn, i. 212
  Ex river, i. 342 _bis_
  Excavation at Pendeen, ii. 284
  Exceter Brygge, iv. 255
  Exchequer, iv. 20 _bis_
  ―――― court, pleas of the crown in, iii. 442
  ―――― records, iii. 139――iv. 138
  ―――― rolls, iii. 140
  Exeter assizes, ii. 293
  ―――― bishop of, i. 15, 116, 135, 209, 231, 243, 250, 367, 377, 386,
    387, 392, 396, 397, 407, 409――ii. 3, 6, 24, 50, 51 _quin._, 52, 54,
    57, 61, 62, 70 _bis_, 92, 104, 106, 115, 116, 130, 141, 144, 203,
    204, 258, 260, 265, 299, 302, 309, 315――iii. 1 _quat._, 5, 40, 60,
    110, 111, 141, 175, 177, 179 _bis_, 180, 181, 210, 224, 231, 254,
    257, 267, 268, 332, 354 _bis_, 370, 373 _bis_, 428, 441, 443――iv.
    44, 47, 53, 116 _bis_, 152, 164 _bis_, 185.――His royalties proved,
    iii. 2.――William Brewer, his history, i. 130. Peter Courtenay 373.
    Peter Quiril 300. Walter 251.――Bartholomew, ii. 415. Edulphus 7.
    Frederick 58. Leofric 69, 203, 211, 212, 215. Walter 69. Gervase
    Babington 7. William Brewer 95. Walter Brounscomb 96. John Grandison
    96, 341. Keppell 224. Peter Quiril 412. Dr. John Ross 224. Walter de
    Stapledon 143. John Voysey 195. Dr. Ward 4. William Warlewast
    87.――William Brewar, iii. 182. William Buller 301. William Carey 4,
    271. William Cotton 233. Peter Courtenay 181. Dr. Fox 141. John de
    Grandison 2. Hall 79. George Lavington 3. Dr. Redman 142. John Ross
    300. Edmund Stafford 446. Sir Jonathan Trelawnny 295, 296, 297
    _bis_. Robert Warlewast 456, 457. Stephen Weston 46. Thomas 2 _bis_.
    William, 2.――Carey, iv. 166. Walter Brounscomb 2
  ―――― bishops, consistory of, iii. 181
  ―――― bishopric of, ii. 95, 113
  ―――― canonry, iii. 460
  ―――― canons of, iv. 66 _bis_――Rev. J. Grant, iii. 40. Rev. John
    Rogers 54, 77, 445. Nicholas 60
  ―――― cathedral, i. 130――ii. 265, 341――iii. 182, 233, 258 _bis_, 309, 373
  ―――― chancellor of, iii. 269.――Rev. John Penneck, ii. 217
  ―――― church, i. 349――ii. 61――iii. 320, 363, 367 at, iii. 309
  Exeter city, i. 59 _bis_, 88 _bis_, 284, 342 _bis_――ii. 76, 189,
    190, 191, 224, 299――iii. 25, 96, 160, 364――iv. 184.――Insurrection
    in, i. 296.――Bishoprics of Cornwall and Kirton removed to, ii. 61,
    69. Defence of against Perkin Warbeck 189. Cornish rebels march to
    195. Siege of 196. Relieved 197. Rev. J. Smyth died at 286.――Reduced
    by Lord Berkeley, iv. 14. St. Boniface educated at 126. Isaac’s
    Memorials of 111.――Guildhall of, iii. 309. Members of parliament
    for, John Buller 249. Mr. Kekewitch 19. Charles Trevanion steward of 199
  ―――― college, Oxford, ii. 71, 111, 116, 130, 141, 143, 144, 221,
    224, 228, 233, 265, 281, 307, 355, 389――iii. 50, 51, 67, 84, 141,
    152, 155 _bis_, 156, 167, 171 _ter._, 408――iv. 144, 145
  ―――― dean of, Edward Trelawney, ii. 230 _bis_――John Arundell, iii. 141
  ―――― dean and chapter of, i. 129, 236, 242, 344, 366――ii. 253, 256,
    275――iii. 171, 177, 179, 257, 258, 313, 316, 332, 426 _bis_,
    427――iv. 66, 67, 118, 121, 157, 159
  ―――― deanery, i. 130
  ―――― diocese, iii. 307.――Its registry, ii. 348――iii. 257, 316, 332
  ―――― Domesday, iii. 353
  ―――― Joseph de, i. 325, 326, 342 _bis_.――Walter de, iv. 111
  ―――― market, i. 79
  ―――― Marquis of, iv. 97.――Henry Courtenay, i. 64, 65――ii. 375
  ―――― name, iii. 458
  ―――― road from, i. 20
  ―――― see of, i. 130, 231, 403――ii. 70――iii. 271, 456. Transferred
    there 415
  Exmouth, i. 169
  “Extent of Cornish acres,” iv. 7, 15, 24, 41, 67, 96, 112, 153, 162
  ―――― of all the parishes in Cornwall from Mr. Hitchins’s
    measurement, Appendix I. iv. 177
  Eyans of Eyanston, i. 142
  Eynesbury, i. 99. Hunts, ii. 263

  Fairfax, i. 44.――Sir Thomas 143――iv. 74
  ―――― the parliamentary general, iii. 81. Hopton’s surrender to 189
  Fairs, custom of displaying a glove, iii. 309
  Fal, Fale, or Fall river, ii. 356――iii. 210, 361, 403, 404. Part of
    it stopped up 405――iv. 117
  Falemuth, by Leland, iv. 288
  Falgenne, ii. 1
  Fall, James, i. 268
  Falmouth borough, iii. 8. United with Penryn 99
  ―――― district, i. 346
  ―――― harbour, i. 26, 359――ii. 1, 24, 48, 275, 276 _bis_, 281 _bis_,
    357――iii. 180, 189, 190, 207, 224, 231, 395, 404――iv. 70, 72, 75,
    84.――Its breadth, extent, numerous arms and traffic, ii. 17.
    Description of 1. Pleasant country around and fine timber 2. Greeks
    fetched tin from 3, a hundred sail may lie at anchor in, without
    seeing each others maintops 3. Rhymes upon 3, 17. One of the best in
    the kingdom 16. Most advantageous station for packets, but inferior
    in accommodation for larger ships to Plymouth or Portsmouth 18.
    Extraordinary story of a boat driven from 320, 324.――Stone sent to
    London from, iii. 63
  ―――― Lord, i. 20, 310――ii. 117. Buys Trelisick 33.――Viscount, iii.
    215 _bis_, 217, 220.――Earl of, ii. 357――iii. 74, 189, 220, 221――iv.
    5.――For six days only, John Robarts, ii. 379.――Lady, iv. 167
  ―――― parish, i. 136――ii. 97. Rocks of St. Feock similar to those in 35
  FALMOUTH parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ii. 1.
    Dismembered from Budock 15th Charles Second, Sir Peter Killigrew
    having built a new church 3. Rectory, patron, first rector, church
    consecrated, incumbent, rector’s house and garden, pulpit cloth,
    manors and seats, Arwinike 4. Town 8. Pendennis castle 12. By Tonkin
    15. Arwinick 17. By Editor, harbour, Fox family 18. Irregular trade
    with Lisbon 19. Known to the ancients, various names ascribed,
    British name Smithike, story of Pennycumquick, church dedicated to
    King Charles 20. Town extended northward, new houses convenient,
    beautiful villas, sends in conjunction with Penryn two members to
    parliament, statistics, present rector 23. Geology by Dr. Boase 24
  Falmouth river, iii. 405
  ―――― town, ii. 17――iii. 16, 96, 121, 189, 228, 305――iv. 72,
    229.――Incorporated by Charles Second, contained only five houses
    within the memory of persons living, new name first recorded when it
    had increased to five or six hundred, opposition to John Killigrew
    building the town, ii. 8. Memorial to the king, referred to Sir
    Nicholas Hals, his answer and reasons 9. King approved the project,
    Mr. Killigrew continued his buildings, inhabitants enriched, market
    10. Chief inhabitants, custom house officers, gave the title of earl
    to Charles Lord Berkeley, of viscount to George Fitzroy, son of
    Charles the Second, and to Hugh Boscawen, of Tregothnan 11. Fortunes
    made by irregular commerce 19. Road to 104. From London 344. Road to
    Marazion from 215.――Passage to Truro from, iii. 226. Road from
    Helston to 63. From Truro 304.――Has the same mayor as Truro, iv. 77,
    84. Has more inhabitants than Truro 85
  Fanhope, Lord, iii. 27
  Fann, i. 172
  Fanshaw of Basill, Robert, i. 201
  FARABURY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, ii. 48. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax 49. By
    Tonkin, patron and incumbent ibid. By Editor, smallest parish in
    Cornwall, consolidation of benefice, situation of church, name,
    statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 50
  Farnabie, Thomas, his origin, parentage and history, iv. 86. A
    royalist, monument to in Sevenoak’s church, his works, Boyle’s
    character of him, dedicated his Horace to Prince Henry, and
    favorably received by him 87. Thomas, of London, carpenter, his
    father, and the mayor of Truro his grandfather 86
  Farnham, Nicholas de, i. 290.――Mr. iii. 236
  Farrabury parish, iii. 232, 236
  Fast, ii. 82
  Fasti, iii. 297
  Fatal Curiosity, a tragedy, ii. 102
  Fatwork Mine, i. 227, 230
  Faustine, i. 206
  Fawey, by Leland, iv. 276
  Fayrer, Rev. Joseph, iv. 47
  Felicia, Wife of Guy, Earl of Warwick, iv. 114
  Felicitas, Sancta, iii. 339
  Fenterwarson, village, ii. 405
  Fenton, ii. 1
  ―――― Berran, iii. 322
  ―――― East and West, i. 199
  Fenton Gymps of Fenton Gymps, Joan, iii. 324 _bis_. John, John,
    John, John 323. John 324 _bis_. Ralph 323. Family 323
  ―――― Gymps manor, iii. 323, 324. Account of 322
  ―――― Gymps Veor, iii. 322, 324 _bis_
  ―――― Gymps Vyan, iii. 324 _ter._
  ―――― Vease, iii. 319
  Fentongellan, i. 116
  Fentongimps, i. 243
  Fentongollan family, iii. 208, 209
  ―――― manor, iii. 182, 189, 208, 212 _bis_, 215, 221, 464. Account of
    by Hals 209. By Tonkin 210. By Lysons 214. House 221. Gone 212.
    Hals’s description lengthy 213
  Fentonwoon, account of, ii. 405
  Fentrigan, or Ventrigan Manor, iv. 127
  ―――― downs, races at, iii. 35
  Feock parish, ii. 280, 298, 309――iii. 170, 306――iv. 90
  ―――― St. ii. 24. His wife and children 25
  FEOCK, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, value of benefice, patronage, incumbent, land-tax, the
    saint, his figure in the church window, ii. 24. Dwelling of Captain
    Penrose, his history 25. Tregew 30. Cornish tongue spoken there till
    1640, administration of the sacrament in Cornish 31. Lanyon’s
    alms-houses 32. By Tonkin ibid. By Editor, Trelisick ibid.
    Killiganoon 34. Feock Downs, Come to Good, statistics and Geology 35
  Feock’s, St. by Leland, iv. 272
  Ferabery, Feraberry or Ferabury, iv. 66, 68
  Ferint ab Erbyn, ii. 50
  Ferrar, i. 199
  Ferrers, William de, iii. 165. Mr. 134.――Family, i. 151――ii.
    313――iv. 47, 137. De 258. Arms 134
  ―――― of Newton Ferrers, Devon, arms, iii. 134
  ―――― of Tutbury castle, Staffordshire, family and arms, iii. 134
  ―――― Earl, Henry and Wakelyn, ii. 89
  Festing, Rev. C. G. R. of Paul, iii. 290
  Feversham church, iii. 114
  Fielding, i. 57
  Figtree, in Gwithian churchyard, ii. 150
  Filley parish, ii. 281, 357――iii. 416
  Finch family, ii. 67.――Judge, iii. 144
  Fincher, Rev. Mr. of Dulo, i. 317 _bis_, 318 _bis_.――Rev. Mr. of
    Veryan, iv. 118
  Finisterre, Cape, iii. 218
  Firbisse, Dudley, iv. 146
  Fish, habits of, ii. 265
  Fishal bay, i. 236
  Fisheries, St. Ives famous for, iii. 261. Especially for pilchards, ib.
  Fitz, ii. 71
  ―――― of Fitzford, i. 347.――Near Tavistock, Sir John, iv. 41
  Fitz-Geoffrey, Charles, i. 315
  Fitzgerald, Lady Anne, and Charles Earl of Kildare, i. 297. Earls of
    Kildare 34
  Fitzhamon, Robert, Earl of Carbill in Normandy, ii. 344
  Fitz-Harry, Reginald, i. 203. Earl of Cornwall 296, 36――iii. 456, 463
  Fitz-John, Margaret and Richard, iii. 149
  Fitz-Roy, George, Viscount Falmouth, and Earl of Northumberland, and
    his arms, ii. 11.――Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, iv. 82 _ter._, 84
    _ter._ A charter from 83
  Fitz Walter, i. 170――ii. 292
  Fitz Warren family, ii. 415
  ―――― Warren, Foulk Bourchier, Lord, i. 170
  Fitz-William, Elizabeth, iii. 303. Sir John 302, 303.――Mabile, iv.
    26. Robert 103 _bis_. Roger 26
  ―――― of Hall, Elizabeth, ii. 409, 410. Gervase, Sir John, _bis_,
    Robert, William, _bis_, 409. Family 409. Arms 410
  Flambard, Ralph, Bishop of Durham, and Lord Treasurer, ii. 290
  Flamborough head, iii. 10
  Flammock, etymology of name, i. 85. Thomas 86 _bis_.――The rebel,
    iii. 388.――Hanged, i. 87. William and his arms 85
  Flammock of Bodmin, i. 387
  ―――― of Gomronson, i. 392. John 387
  ――――’s rebellion, history of, i. 61, 86, 369――ii. 188. His rebels 187
  Flanders, i. 195, 335――iii. 143――iv. 157
  ―――― war, iv. 116
  Flandrensis, Richard and Stephen, i. 104
  Flavell, Rev. T., of Mullion and Ruan Major, monument to, iii. 258
  Fleet prison, iii. 268
  Fleet street, London, iii. 251
  Flemanck, Mark le, i. 86
  Flemen family, iii. 78, 80, 90 _bis_, 94
  Flemming family, descent, i. 104.――Family, ii. 292
  Fleta, ii. 6
  Fletcher, Rev. J. R., of Quethiock, iii. 373
  Flete, Thomas, iii. 247
  Flintshire, ii. 65
  Flood, i. 260
  Flora, goddess, ii. 165
  Floyd, ii. 320――iii. 168, 394, 429 _bis_――iv. 13.――His dictionary,
    iii. 403
  Flushing, in Mylor parish, packet station removed from Falmouth to,
    ii. 11
  ―――― in Nankersy, iii. 227, 231. Description of, improved by Mr.
    Trefusis 227. Now going to decay 228
  Fonnereau, Thomas, his history, ii. 358.――An adventurer, iii. 423
  Fontevrault, in Anjou, i. 341
  Fooda village, ii. 405
  Foot of Treleyassick, Friend, John and Sarah, ii. 55
  Foote, Mr. i. 205.――John, of Truro, ii. 121.――Rev. T., vicar of
    Leskeard, iii. 21.――Samuel, ii. 90 _bis_. His first publication was
    a domestic tragedy 90
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 207. John 204 _bis_. Henry 204 _bis_. Samuel 204
  ―――― of Tregony, i. 204
  Foow of Tiverton, i. 172
  Forbes, Rev. Mr. a miser, i. 317
  Forrabury rocks, ii. 274
  Forrester family, iii. 9
  Forschall, Rev. Josiah, iii. 408
  Forster, Rev. Benjamin, account of, and letters published by Mr.
    Nichols, i. 71
  Fortescue, Mr. i. 36, 283. Family 391.――The parliamentary colonel
    and governor of Pendennis castle, ii. 14. John 185 _bis_. Appointed
    sheriff of Cornwall, assaulted St. Michael’s Mount, but was repulsed
    184. Family 77. Rev. George, of St. Mellian 167.――Rev. George, of
    Pillaton, iii. 348. Hugh, ancestor of Earl Fortescue 216. Sir John,
    Lord Chancellor 191. Martin, acquired Buckland Filleigh by marriage
    148. Miss 163. Mr. 193.――Colonel, iv. 185
  ―――― of Devon, Mr. ii. 251
  ―――― of Fallowpit, Devon, Elizabeth, ii. 339
  ―――― of Filleigh, Hugh, i. 205. Family 387.――Hugh, ii. 68.――Arthur,
    iii. 191
  ―――― of Pencoll, Arthur, i. 387
  ―――― of Vallapit, ii. 190
  Forth, Earl of, iv. 186
  Foss, i. 10
  Fosses Moor, ii. 121
  Fossiliferous slate, i. 343
  Four Barrow Down, ii. 317
  Fowey borough, its franchise, ii. 412.――Represented several times by
    the Rashleighs, iv. 107. Jonathan Rashleigh, M.P. for 101, 107.
    Philip 108. William 109
  ―――― church, i. 52; or Foy, Mr. Treffrye contributed towards its
    erection, ii. 43
  ―――― harbour, ii. 36, 39, 409, 412――iv. 23; or Foye, ii. 88
  ―――― mines and Lanescot Consols, iv. 110
  ―――― parish, ii. 92, 413――iv. 110, 158
  FOWEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    impropriation, ancient chapel at, tutelary saint, her history by
    the Editor, ii. 36. Her body found 37. Church and tower, town,
    franchise, incorporation, form of writ, arms, markets and fairs,
    liberties of the Cinque Ports, had sixty tall line of battle ships
    temp. Edw. 3, 38. Assisted in the siege of Calais, grew rich by
    French prizes, afterwards turned pirates, town burnt and
    inhabitants massacred by the French 39. Again obtained letters 40,
    and relapsed into piracy, insulted King Edward’s messenger, and
    were punished, beauty and security of the harbour, blockhouses, an
    engagement between them and a Dutch frigate 41. Plase, Treffreye
    family, chief inhabitants of the town, hospital endowed by Mr.
    Rashleigh, the history of his fortune 44. By the Editor, remarks
    on the above, feudal supremacy of Tywardreth priory, right of
    voting 45. Manor, Rashleigh family, Mr. Austen’s works, Lysons’s
    account of the repulse of the French 46. Mr. Rashleigh’s
    collections and writings, letter of Thomas Cromwell, the brothers
    Lamb 47. Statistics and Geology 48
  Fowey river, i. 172 _bis_, 179 _bis_――ii. 91, 379 _bis_, 390,
    391――iii. 24 _bis_, 25 _bis_, 121, 262.――Or Foye, iv. 29, 30 _bis_,
    111, 155. Or haven 110.――Choked, iii. 25, 26.――Ford across, iv. 30.
    Source of 237
  ―――― road, iv. 32
  ―――― tower, iv. 229
  ―――― town, ii. 39, 41, 44, 45 _quat._, 48, 400, 411――iii. 20, 26,
    67, 71, 219――iv. 36, 38, 99, 107, 187, 188.――Collector of customs
    at, ii. 47. Once a mere village 412.――Road to, iii. 439.――By Leland,
    iv. 290.――Or Foye, ii. 88. Siege of 40
  ―――― Robert de Cardinam, Lord of, iii. 27
  Fowler, ii. 51
  Fox, the parliamentary captain and governor of Pendennis castle, ii. 14
  ―――― Messrs. their iron-works and character, iii. 305
  ―――― Miss, of Deal, iii. 159
  ―――― of Par, T. W. family, first settled there, removed to Falmouth,
    ii. 18
  ―――― Acts and Monuments, i. 233――ii. 195――iii. 210.――His
    Martyrology, ii. 193
  Foxworthy, Mr. iv. 74
  Foyefenton, i. 199
  Fraddon, i. 388
  Frampton, J. A. iii. 293
  ―――― castle, iv. 228
  France, i. 214――ii. 40, 59, 64, 86, 108 _bis_, 123, 244――iii. 121,
    133, 142, 150, 171, 187, 400, 401, 453, 464――iv. 169.――Court of, i.
    311. Kings of 335.――Peace between England, Holland, and, ii. 43.
    Tobacco sold cheap in 43. Protestants of, are Calvinists 74. St.
    German’s remains restored to 78. Pronunciation in 127. St. Dye a
    native of 133. War with 254.――Lord Hollis ambassador to, iii. 148.
    Fear of invasion from 97. Wars with 439.――Trade of Looe with, iv.
    36. Wars between us and 24, 144
  Francis, St. i. 81 _ter._, 82 _ter._, 175 _ter._, 176 _ter._――iii.
    19.――His history, i. 80. Written by St. Bonaventure 81
  Franciscans, i. 79, 176, 312.――iv. 73. Francis de Exeter said to be
    one 111. (_See Friars_)
  Franks, i. 411
  Freathy family, ii. 252
  Frederick, Emperor, i. 130
  Frederick 2nd King of Castille, i. 311
  French architecture, iv. 140
  ―――― court, ii. 188
  ―――― crew, surprise a Cornish party at a Christmas supper, and carry
    them into Brittany, iv. 24
  ―――― family, iii. 276
  ―――― fleet, ii. 245, 246. Seized the town of Marazion 171. Appeared
    in Plymouth sound 246
  ―――― invasion, ii. 40
  ―――― king, ii. 171――iii. 130
  ―――― language, iii. 20
  ―――― men, iv. 99, 157; and Spaniards, sea fight with 21
  ―――― people, claim the appearance of St. Michael, ii. 172
  ―――― power in India, Pondicherry the chief seat of, iv. 11
  ―――― prizes, ii. 39 _ter._
  ―――― revolution, and Editor’s opinion upon, ii. 247
  ―――― wars, ii. 27, 94, 276――iii. 111, 183――iv. 101.――Edward 3rd’s
    ii. 39. Henry 5th’s 176
  Frendon, Gilbert de, iii. 354
  Friars, Augustine, or Black Friars mendicant, i. 83. Carmelite, or
    of the blessed Lady of Mount Carmel ibid.
  ―――― Cistercian or white, i. 83
  ―――― Dominican, i. 83
  ―――― Franciscan or Cordelier, i. 79, 80, 81, 82, 311 _bis_, or
    mendicant 82. History of their founder 80. Manner of living 82.
    When they came into England, their first convent here at
    Canterbury 83
  Friars of St. Francis of Paula, i. 83
  ―――― Mendicant, number in England, i. 83
  ―――― observants, i. 82
  Frignis, Gregory, mayor of Truro, iv. 77
  Friscobard, Amery of, i. 338
  Froissart, ii. 176
  Frost, William, mayor of Exeter, ii. 189
  Frowick, i. 53
  Froyns, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Frye, Rev. P., of St. Winnow, iv. 159
  Fueran, cell at, iii. 331
  Fulford, Sir Thomas, ii. 189
  ―――― Rev. John, of Probus, iii. 181
  Fuller, i. 108, 109
  ――――’s Gloucestershire, ii. 198
  ―――― Worthies, iii. 277
  Fullford, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Fulton river, or canal navigation, iv. 17
  Funeral monuments, cross-legged figures on, iii. 132
  Furley, Rev. Samuel, of Roach, iii. 396, 399. His character 399
  Furnace, reverberatory, introduced into Cornwall, i. 365
  Furneaux abbey, i. 320
  Furzdon of Devonshire, Mr. iii. 228
  Furze rock, iv. 29
  Fuschia adolphina, iv. 182
  ―――― apetela, iv. 182
  ―――― coccinea, iv. 182
  ―――― conica, iv. 182
  ―――― globosa, iv. 182
  ―――― gracilis, iv. 182
  ―――― maxima, iv. 182
  ―――― robertsia, iv. 182
  ―――― virgata, iv. 182
  Fust castle, iv. 228
  Fyning manor, iii. 206

  Gabriel, angel, i. 367
  Gaisford, Rev. Thomas, Dean of Christ Church, ii. 266
  Gaius, i. 335
  Galfridus Monmouthensis, i. 337, 397――iii. 79.――His Chronicle, ii. 50
  Galilee, iv. 100
  Gall, Henry, married Thomasine Bonaventure, his death, iv. 133
  Galleford or Camelford, ii. 402
  Gallia, i. 214――iv. 116
  ―――― Celtica, i. 107
  Galsworthy of Hartland, Mr. ii. 347
  Galton borough, ii. 162
  Games, John, iii. 83
  Gandi, Peter, iv. 28
  Gannell creek, i. 246. Account of 249
  Gardiner, Elizabeth, and Stephen Bishop of Winchester, ii. 194
  Garganus, mount, ii. 172
  Garlenick in Creed, iii. 454
  Garles, _see Grylls_
  Garnegan, i. 215
  Garrows, i. 415
  Garsike, by Leland, iv. 264
  Gascoign wine, iii. 182, 248
  Gascoigne, i. 338――iv. 145
  Gauerygan, account of, i. 224
  ―――― of Gauerygan, i. 224. Arms 225
  Gaul, i. 107 _bis_, 294――ii. 131
  Gaulis, Marianne, iii. 231
  Gaulish forests, i. 333, 336
  Gaunt, John of, iii. 65
  Gaurigan, ancestor of Charles Bodville, Earl of Radnor, iv. 73
  Gaveston, Piers, i. 338
  Gayer of Araler-Grace, Samuel, i. 256
  Gazania rigens, iv. 182
  Geach, i. 10
  Geake, Mr. iii. 42
  Gear, account of, i. 364
  Gedy of Trebersey, Richard, iii. 337 _bis_. Family 337
  Gee, Rev. Walter, of Wick St. Mary, iv. 136
  Geenlow, i. 344
  Genefre, St. ii. 430
  Genesis, book of, iii. 69
  Genesius, St. ii. 86
  Geneva, iii. 188
  Genevour, wife of King Arthur, iii. 337
  Genis, John, ii. 423
  Genlyn, account of, i. 365
  Gennis, St. Manor, ii. 87
  Gennis, St. parish, ii. 232――iii. 275, 352, 353.――or St. Gennys, ii.
    234, 273
  GENNYS ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, incumbent, impropriator, ii. 86. By Editor, the
    Saint, Treveeg by Mr. Lysons ibid. Arms of the Yeo’s, manor of St.
    Gennis, Lord Rolle’s manor, Treworgy, Braddon family 87.
    Statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 88
  Genoese, Sir H. Killigrew, Ambassador to, ii. 372
  Gentleman’s Magazine, ii. 295――iv. 141. Communication to, respecting
    Tywardreth priory 104
  Geographers, ancient, vague and uncertain, ii. 19
  Geological society of Cornwall, ii. 100 _ter._――Instituted by Dr.
    Paris, Dr. Boase secretary to, iii. 95. Transactions of 11――iv. 166
  Geology, Dr. Boase on, iii. 95, 100.――Principles of, ii. 47――iii. 57
  George, William, iii. 387
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 75, 112, 304, 351, 431――iii. 62, 135, 201――iv.
    21, 157
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 303, 407――iii. 28, 62, 367――iv. 21, 107
  ―――― 3rd, i. 157――ii. 158――iii. 106, 219, 235, 249.――His accession,
    i. 321.――Bells rung by the same men at his coronation and jubilee,
    iv. 18
  ―――― 4th, King, iv. 18
  ―――― St. i. 157
  ―――― St. island, iv. 26
  George’s, St. channel, i. 234, 289, 407――ii. 48, 145, 182, 237, 273,
    282, 283, 340――iii. 253, 280, 430
  Geran, i. 413
  Gerance, parish, ii. 5, 275
  Gerandus, St. ii. 51
  Geranium, iv. 182
  Gerans, parish, ii. 275
  GERANS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ii. 50. Value
    of benefice, endowment, saint, patron, incumbent, land tax, seats,
    Tregeare 51. Dispute for its possession 52. Judge Dolben 53.
    Treligan, Rosteage, Trewince 54. By Tonkin, tenure, Nosworthy
    family, Trewithian, Trelegar 55. The Beacon, Tregaliavean, Rosteage
    56. By Editor, Rosteague ibid. Trewince, prospect from church,
    Bowling Green, endowment of church, Polskatho, Pettigrew, Nanquitty,
    Tregeare 57. Trewithian, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 58
  Gerard, Fitton, Earl of Macclesfield, i. 67
  Gereon, St. ii. 51
  Gerint ab Erbyn, i. 338. Elegy upon, ib. King Arthur’s admiral 404
  German accession, iii. 216
  ―――― court, ii. 407
  ―――― custom of trying after execution, iii. 186
  ―――― line of English Princes, ii. 244
  ―――― ocean, iii. 11
  ―――― Protestants are Lutherans, ii. 74
  ―――― sea, ii. 27
  ―――― soldiers driven from Charlestown to St. Ives by the wind, ii. 268
  ―――― St. ii. 59, 60. His history, bishop of Auxerre, heresies of the
    Arians and Pelagians 63. He came over to refute the Pelagians,
    succeeded, preached at St. Alban’s 64. Victory obtained by his
    prayers 65
  German’s, St. abbey, ii. 60; or monastery 61, 62. Abbot of 62
  ―――― bishoprick, ii. 60
  ―――― chapel at St. Alban’s, ii. 65, 75
  ―――― creek, i. 32――ii. 363――iii. 436
  ―――― Lord, iii. 39.――Earl of, ii. 234
  ―――― manor, iii. 2
  ―――― parish, i. 343――ii. 87, 118, 361, 362, 363, 364 _bis_――iii.
    118, 119, 124, 167, 245, 275, 371, 436 _bis_, 440
  GERMANS, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rectory, chancel, ii.
    59. Abbey, once the cathedral see 60; afterwards collegiate
    church, derivation of the word abbat 61. Hircanus the Levite,
    value of the priory, borough 62. Election of members, writ, arms
    of the priory, market and fair, history of saint 63. Priory-house
    65. Eliots 66. Seats, Bake, Coltdrynike, Millinike 67. Hendre,
    Catchfrench 68. By Tonkin, town, first return to parliament 68.
    Elective franchise, sometimes called Cuddenbeck; the priory by
    Browne Willis 69. Eliot family 70. Priory-house 71. Seat of a
    suffragan bishop to Exeter, advowsons and impropriation 72. By
    Editor, saint’s celebrity, doctrines of Pelagius 72. Saint’s
    history 73. Various places in Britain dedicated to him,
    improvements at the priory 74. Statute for suffragan bishopricks,
    Bake, Mr. Moyle and his works 76. Aldwinick, Catchfrench, Sir John
    Eliot’s quarrel with Mr. Moyle 77. Statistics 78. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Clicker Tor, and Trerule foot 79
  German’s, St. priory, ii. 70, 75, 123, 361, 362――iii. 245, 253,
    336――iv. 69 _bis_.――Prior of, ii. 59, 118, 119 _bis_, 365――iii. 336
  ―――― town, iii. 268. The Cornish see removed to 415
  Germanes, St. by Leland, iv. 281
  Germanus, St. his history by the Editor, ii. 72. His victory
    explained, came a second time to Britain 74. Converted a pagan army,
    his death and burial, and places dedicated to him 75
  Germany, ii. 407 _bis_――iii. 285. Persecution of the Protestants in
    67.――St. Boniface undertook to convert, iv. 126 _bis_
  ―――― the apostle of, iv. 126
  Germayn’s, St. by Leland, iv. 291
  Germo, ii. 126
  Germocus, St. by Leland, iv. 264
  Germoe, King, his throne, i. 125
  ―――― parish, iv. 89
  ―――― people of, ii. 82
  Germow parish, i. 118 _bis_――ii. 169
  ―――― St. said to be an Irish king, his tomb and chair, ii. 81
  GERMOW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, Godolphin Ball,
    ii. 80. By Tonkin, Godolphin Ball ibid. Name of parish, saint 81. By
    Editor, Hals’s history of St. Gordian, tradition of St. Germoe,
    village of Bojil, William Lemon 81. Process of mining 82. Mr.
    Lemon’s mine at Trowell 83. Gwennap mines, Cavnon adit, a present
    from Frederick Prince of Wales to Mr. Lemon 84. Lemon family 85.
    Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 85
  Gernigan, Anne and Sir Henry, iii. 140
  Gernon, Geoffrey de, ii. 209
  Gernow, i. 300
  Geron’s, St. iv. 274. By Leland ibid.
  Gerrance, i. 26
  Gerrans parish, iv. 117 _ter._, 124
  Gerrard, Sir William, ii. 235
  Gerras mines, i. 20
  Gerry, Rev. Mr. ii. 319
  Gerson’s parish, ii. 281
  Geruncius, King of the Britons, ii. 50
  Gervasius, St. i. 99
  Gerveys, Elizabeth and John, ii. 396
  Getulius, a Roman citizen and martyr, iv. 117
  Ghent, ii. 127, 345
  Giant, story of a, ii. 113
  Giant’s hedge, description of, iv. 29
  Gibbon’s account of the Paleologi, ii. 368
  Gibbs, Dr. James, his Life, ii. 111
  ―――― of St. Colomb, i. 396
  Gibson, Captain Charles, R. N. ii. 375 _bis_
  Giddy, Rev. Edward, i. 362. Catherine ibid. Davies 363.――Edward,
    iii. 97. His character 93. Arranged the cabinet of the Cornish
    Geological Society 100. Rev. Edward, the Editor’s father 159, 337.
    John, memoir of 273. Thomas, his character 96. Family 94
  ―――― of Trebersey family, iii. 39
  Gifford family, ii. 153 _bis_.――Mr. Bishop’s assumed name, iii. 143
  ―――― of Fewborough family, iii. 222
  Giggy, St. ii. 254. His well ibid.
  Gilbart, John, iv. 55
  Gilbert, Davies (the Editor), i. 363――iv. 148.――Catherine, his
    daughter, ii. 100. Wife of Grenville 341. Family 189.――C. S. iii.
    151.――His History of Cornwall, i. 234――iii. 151.――Rev. R. P. of St.
    Wenn, iv. 151. W. R. 97
  ―――― of Crompton castle, i. 134
  ―――― of Tacabre, i. 134. Samuel 133, 134.――Of Tachbear, in
    Bridgerule, Samuel, iii. 235. Family 23――iv. 45, 62
  Gilpin, Mr. iii. 166
  Giraldus Cambrensis, i. 305, 337
  Githa, i. 168.――Wife of Earl Godwin, ii. 415.――Of Godwin, Earl of
    Kent, iv. 155
  Glamorganshire, ii. 216――iii. 281.――Mr. Daniel’s smelting-house in,
    ii. 33.――Supplied Cornwall with steam-engines, iii. 305
  Glant parish, ii. 36――iii. 425――iv. 99
  GLANT parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ii. 88. Ancient name,
    value of benefice, endowment, patron, vicar, impropriation,
    land-tax, Penevit 89. By Tonkin, name, etymology 90. By Editor,
    Hals’s History of St. Sampson, ib. Penquite, Lentyon, a castle,
    name, first boarding-school for young ladies, peculiarities of the
    church, statistics 91. Incumbent, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 92
  Glanvill, Judge, i. 206. Miss 43, 245.――Mr. ii. 59
  ―――― of Catchfrench, Francis, i. 244
  ―――― of Killyvor, John and Mary, i. 221.――Family, iv. 160
  Glanville, Francis, ii. 77 _bis_. Rev. John 234. Family vault in
    Kilkhampton church 352. Family 231, 339.――Frances and William E.
    iii. 219
  Glaseney college, iii. 224. At Penryn 194.――Glasney, ii. 341, 96
    _bis_. Of canons regular 136. Provost of 113――iv. 1, 2. Its founder
    2.――Glassney, Robert Lyddra, provost of, iii. 257
  ―――― monastery near Penryn, iii. 446.――Glasseney, ii. 286
  Glasgow, i. 247
  Glasney, John de, i. 246
  Glasnith i. 209
  Glastonbury, i. 306, 337 _bis_――ii. 305――iv. 36
  ―――― abbey, iii. 262――iv. 25. Its dissolution 37. Michael, abbat of 26
  ―――― church of, iv. 26
  ―――― monks of, iv. 26, 27
  ―――― John of, i. 307
  Glebridge manor, account of, ii. 375
  Glenning, Nicholas, i. 113
  Glesnith, by Leland, iv. 271
  Glin, i. 168 _bis_. Account of 171 _bis_
  Globularia longifolia, iv. 182
  Gloucester, i. 113――ii. 76 _bis_
  ―――― Bishop of, William Warburton, ii. 265
  ―――― cathedral, cenotaph to the Rev. J. Smyth in, ii. 278
  ―――― Duke of, Richard, afterwards King, made sheriff of Cornwall,
    ii. 185
  ―――― earls of, ii. 148.――William, i. 266, 288.――William,
    illegitimate son of King Henry 1st, and Robert, his son, ii. 148
  ―――― hall, Oxford, now Worcester college, ii. 233. Its Fasti ibid.
  ―――― honour of, ii. 147, 341
  Glover, Rev. William, ii. 147 _bis_――Rev. William of Phillack, iii.
    344 _bis_
  Glover’s Somersetshire, iii. 186
  Gluvias parish, i. 135 _bis_――ii. 2, 129, 337――iii. 59, 224,
    231――iv. 1. Rev. G. Allanson, vicar of 95
  GLUVIAS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, church before the
    Conquest, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, ii.
    92. Land-tax, seats, Roscrow, Innis, Gosose river and house, Penryn
    borough, the Ocrinum of Ptolemy, antiquity of manor 94. Charters,
    elective franchise, markets, fairs, arms, form of writ,
    insignificance in Carew’s time, subsequent improvement 95. College
    of Black Canons at Glasnewith 96. Inhabitants of Penryn, Lady
    Killigrew’s cup 97. By Tonkin, Enis, ib. Roscrow 98. By Editor,
    etymology, St. Gluvias, borough of Penryn, Enis, Cosawis, Bohelland
    farm, story of “Fatal Curiosity”, 100. Parish fortunate in clergy,
    beauty of situation, dangerous road remedied 104. Statistics, vicar,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 105
  Gluvias, St. ii. 99
  Glyn, John, i. 215. Family 261
  Glynford, i. 172
  Glynn barton, i. 172, 173, 298
  ―――― Dr. Robert, his learning, ii. 153. Held in high respect at
    college, entertained Mr. Pitt 154. Thomas 142. Family 153. Arms
    142.――Jane, iii. 247 _bis_. John murdered 246. John 247, 248 _bis_.
    Thomasine 248. Miss 279. Family 23, 246. Arms 249
  ―――― of Glynn, Denny, i. 172. Edmund and John 173. Nicholas 171.
    Serjeant 173 _bis_. William 172. Family 173, 305. Arms 172.――Thomas,
    ii. 397 _bis_. Family 142, 339, 383, 397 _bis_. Property 397
  ―――― of Glynford, Nicholas, i. 172
  ―――― of Heliton, i. 173
  ―――― of Helston, ii. 339
  Glynne of Polkinhorne, Thomas and William, ii. 137
  Gnaphalium ericoides, iv. 182
  ―――― fetidum, iv. 182
  ―――― stœchas, iv. 182
  Godalgar, etymology, i. 119
  Godfrey, Charles and Charlotte, iii. 217
  Godollon castle, iv. 228
  Godolphin administration, ii. 217
  ―――― Ball, account of by Hals and Tonkin, ii. 80
  ―――― barony, i. 127
  ―――― blowing-house, i. 394
  ―――― earldom, i. 127
  ―――― Sir Francis, i. 123 _ter._, 232, 394 _bis_, 395 _ter._ Francis,
    Earl of 126, 127. Francis, Lord, and Henry 127. John 122 _bis_. Mary
    127. Sidney 59. Sidney, Earl of 123 _bis_, 126 _quat._, 232, 234.
    William 123 _quat._ Sir William 123, 232. Pedigree to the Earl 123.
    From the Earl 126. Family 74, 125, 160, 224, 225, 262 _bis_. Arms
    124. Property 127.――Catherine, ii. 217. Francis 217, 269. Sir
    Francis 9. Sir William 170. Miss 236. Duke of Leeds, heir of 218.
    Family 80 _bis_, 160, 170, 217 _bis_. Patrons of Helston 160. Arms
    335. Monuments and curious inscription on one 219.――Family, iii. 8,
    47 _bis_, 286――iv. 54, 173.――Saying of, iii. 295. A branch of
    57.――Lord, ii. 83, 139, 162, 219
  ―――― of Godolphin, Thomas, recorder of Helston, ii. 160.――John, iii. 211
  ―――― of Treveneage, iii. 81
  ―――― of Treworveneth, family extinct, Colonel William, iii. 288
  ―――― hill, i. 128 _bis_.――Hills, ii. 85
  ―――― house, i. 395
  ―――― lands, i. 119, 121. Etymology 119, 120
  Godrevy, account of, ii. 150
  ―――― point, i. 166――ii. 151
  Godwin, Bishop, i. 130. His catalogue of English Bishops, iii. 415
  ―――― Earl, i. 168――ii. 415.――Of Kent, iv. 155 _bis_, 156
  Godwyn sands, iii. 310
  Golant parish, ii. 390
  Gold, the largest pieces in Cornwall found in Ladock parish, ii. 355
  Golden, Goulden, Gowlden, or Gulden manor, iii. 355, 356, 360, 361,
    365, 464
  ―――― parish, iii. 383
  Goldingham, i. 247 _bis_
  Goldney family, ii. 341
  Goldsithney village, iii. 308. Tale of a fair removed to 309
  Goldsmith, Lieut. R.N. removed the rock at Castle Treryn, iii. 31
  Goldsmith’s rents, London, iv. 86
  Goliah’s sword, i. 334
  Gomronson, account of, i. 392
  Gonnet’s, St. park, iii. 397
  Gonrounson, i. 387
  Gonwallo parish, iii. 127, 128; or Gonwallow, ii. 80, 237
  Gooch of Orford, Suffolk, G. W. iv. 130
  Good Hope, Cape of, iii. 187
  Goodall, Mr. ii. 43
  ―――― of Fowey, John, ii. 98.――Family, iii. 162
  Goodere, Captain, Dineley, Sir Edward, Sir John, i. 204.――Sir J. D.
    Captain Samuel, whose history is tragical, and was published by
    Foote, his nephew, and Miss, iv. 90
  Goodwood, i. 372
  Goodyere, Anne, iii. 159
  Goonhilly downs, i. 304――ii. 331 _bis_――iii. 127, 128, 138
  Goonwyn, ii. 254
  Gooseham village, iii. 255
  Goran manor, iii. 90
  ―――― or Gorran parish, ii. 330――iii. 195, 198, 202, 207
  GORAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, patron, impropriator, incumbent, land-tax, church, prior
    to the Conquest, remarkable places, Goranhoane, Bodrigham, ii.
    106. Family of that name 107. Escape from Bosworth, Bodrigan’s
    leap 108. Discord with the Haleps of Lammoran, Tregarden,
    Tregarthyn family 109. Arms, Trewoolla 110. Family 111. Dr. James
    Gibbs 111. Anthony Wills 112. By Tonkin, etymology, saint 112.
    Trevennen, Trevasens, Polgorror, Treveor, Pennore, Thicavosa,
    story of a giant 113. Situation and description of church, Lady
    Brannell’s tomb, Richard Edgecombe’s monument 114. By Editor,
    Trevascus, Treveor, Bodrigan ibid. Statistics, vicar, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, Deadman point 115
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 414
  Goran-carhayes, i. 413
  Goranhoane, account of, ii. 106
  Gordian, St. account of, ii. 81
  Gordon, Lady Catharine, ii. 186, 191. Perkin Warbeck’s wife,
    pensioned by Henry 7th 191.――Sir A. C. iii. 9
  ―――― St. church, ii. 80
  Gorges, Sir William, i. 348 _bis_
  Gorian, St. a persecutor converted, ii. 112
  Gorien, or Coren, St. a missionary from Ireland, ii. 113
  Goring, general, i. 113. Lord, the royalist general, iii. 81――iv.
    115, 187
  Gorseddan, i. 192
  Gosmoor, i. 220 _bis_
  Gosose, account of, ii. 94, 100
  ―――― creek, ii. 94
  ―――― river, ii. 94
  Gospels, ancient copy of, iii. 408
  Gotherington manor, i. 64――iii. 436
  Gothian, St. ii. 147
  Gothic architecture of Henry 7th’s reign, iv. 81
  Gothland, i. 336
  Gothlois, Earl of Cornwall, etymology of name, iv. 94
  Gothlouis, Duke of Cornwall, i. 324, 327 _quat._, 328 _quat._, 329
    _bis_, 331 _quint._, 332 _bis_, 342. His death 331, and funeral 332
  Gould, John, iii. 42
  ―――― of Downs, William, iii. 249
  Gove of Devon, Elizabeth, iii. 176 _bis_
  Goverigon, ii. 217
  Govill, iii. 402――iv. 117
  Gower, Rev. G. L. of St. Maben, iii. 74. Of St. Michael Penkivell 221
  Goynlase in St. Agnes, iii. 319
  Graas, ii. 292
  Grace, St. iii. 364. Her skeleton ibid.
  Grade parish, ii. 358 _bis_――iii. 128, 257, 421, 423
  GRADE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, ii. 116. By Tonkin, etymology
    and value of benefice ibid. By Editor, etymology, Erisey ibid.
    Advowson of living, feast, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    Cadgwith, quarry at Cogar, Kennick cove 117
  ―――― St. ii. 116 _bis_
  Graffo hundred, Leicestershire, ii. 363
  Graham, Thomas, and Mr. ii. 47.――Rev. H. E. of Ludgian, iii. 54
  Grammar, Farnaby’s system of, iv. 87
  Grampont, iv. 30
  Grampound borough, account of, i. 253, 256, 258, 259――iii.
    395.――Arms, i. 254.――Philip Hawkins, M.P. for, iii. 356, 367. Thomas
    Hawkins 362
  Grampound, town, iii. 360, 371
  Grand Junction canal, iii. 10 _bis_
  ―――― jury, charge to, ii. 76
  Grandison, John de, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 1, 372 _bis_,
    373.――Demanded legacies for endowing churches, ii. 96. Used his
    influence in aid of Bideford bridge 341.――His register, iii. 1
  ―――― John Villiers, Earl of, i. 69
  ―――― Viscount, father of the Duchess of Cleveland, ii. 11
  Granite sent from Penryn to London, i. 242
  Grant, Rev. John of Lezant, iii. 40. Mr. Canon, rector of Ruan
    Lanyhorne 405. Mr. 404
  Grantham, ii. 76.――St. Symphorian and St. Wolfran buried at, iv. 117
  Granville, Sir Bevill, i. 113.――Colonel, ii. 93.――Sir Bevill, iii.
    40. His great victory 351. His death 40. Grace, and John Earl of
    Bath 255. Family 353. Saying of 295
  ―――― of Penheale, Degory, i. 419
  ―――― of Stow, Margaret and Roger _bis_, i. 419
  ―――― Grace, Countess of, and Robert Carteret Earl of, ii. 346
  Graunpond, by Leland, iv. 272
  Graves, Thomas, i. 37.――J. iv. 38
  ―――― Lord, i. 37――ii. 252
  Gray, the poet, i. 71. Mr. 384
  Gray’s Inn, ii. 267
  Great Mystery of Godliness, iii. 79
  ―――― Work mine, ii. 83, 304 _bis_
  Grebble, Mr. iv. 74
  Greece, iii. 187.――Emperor of, ii. 365 _bis_――Artists of, iv. 169
  Greef islands, iv. 237
  Greek church, ii. 370, 371
  ―――― college, ii. 371
  ―――― empire, ii. 373
  ―――― language fashionable in England, ii. 373.――Tables of, iv. 87
  Greeks, i. 341――iii. 395.――Acquainted with Falmouth harbour, ii. 19.
    And fetched tin from it 3
  Green bank, Falmouth, i. 137
  Greenough, Mr. iv. 124
  Greenwich, ii. 223, 359, 399――iii. 281, 375, 376
  ―――― East, ii. 56
  Greenwich observatory, the first meridian, ii. 222
  Grees, Germaine, iv. 77
  Grefe by Leland, iv. 289. Islet by Leland and trajectus 274
  Grege, William, iii. 16
  Gregor, Francis, ii. 393.――Rev. William, iii. 113. Mrs.
    406.――Francis, iv. 77, 89, 121, 129. William 123. His analysis of
    Veryan limestone 123, 124. Family 74, 89, 128, 130
  ―――― of Cornelly, i. 204
  ―――― of Gurlyn, account of, i. 349
  ―――― of Tredinike, Francis, i. 243, 244 _sex._ John 243, 244. Miss
    244 _bis_. Rev. William ibid.――Family, iii. 112
  ―――― of Trewarthenick, Mr. ii. 407.――Francis, iii. 315 _bis_, 318
    _ter._ His ancestors 318. Mr. 54.――Family, ii. 407
  ―――― of Truro, ii. 93――iii. 327
  Gregory, Mr. ii. 146
  ―――― Pope, ii. 203, 212
  ―――― St. Pope, ii. 288
  ―――― 1st, or the Great Pope, iii. 284, 285――ii. 287. His letter
    preserved 288
  ―――― 9th, Pope, i. 312
  ―――― 13th, Pope, founded a college for Greek children at Rome,
    opposed the Greek errors, his calendar, ii. 370
  Gregov, M^c, i. 365
  Grenfell, Pascoe, ii. 216. Pascoe, jun. notice of ibid.
  ―――― of Marazion, Emma, ii. 224
  Grenville, Anne, and Rt. Hon. Bernard, ii. 98. Bernard, sheriff of
    Devon 341. Bernard, father of Sir Beville and Sir Richard 348 _bis_.
    Sir Bevill 31. Sheriff of Cornwall 186. Sir Beville 333 _ter._, 334.
    Registry of his baptism 348. Sold Lanew and Bryn 332. His letter to
    Sir John Trelawny 349. His character 343. By Editor 348. His death
    in the battle of Lansdowne 343. Epitaph to 347. Poetical 348.
    Charles 351. George, sheriff of Devon 341. George, M.P. for
    Cornwall, rhyme on his election, created Lord Lansdowne, a poet, his
    imprisonment and death 351. Grace, Countess Granville 346. John 342.
    Sir John, afterwards Earl of Bath 333, 345, 350. Dispossessed Noye
    by unjust litigation of an estate sold to him by Sir Bevill 333.
    Instrumental to the restoration, created Earl of Bath, &c. 345.
    Built the mansion at Stowe 346, 351. Earls of Bath 340. Richard,
    sheriff of Cornwall, and Richard, sheriff of Devon 341. Richard,
    descended from Rollo, Duke of Normandy, came over with William the
    Conqueror 344. Sir Richard, vice-admiral 342. His battle with the
    Spaniards, and death 344. Sir Richard 342. Registry of his baptism
    348. Called by the rebels Skellum Grenville, imprisoned, Clarendon’s
    unamiable character of him, his death 345. Robert, sheriff of
    Cornwall 341. Roger, Capt. R.N. 341, 344. Lost in the Mary Rose
    frigate 342. Sir Theobald promoted the building of Bideford bridge
    341. William, Archbishop of York, son of Sir Theobald 344. Family,
    by Lysons, settled at Bideford 341. Possessed the manor of
    Kilkhampton nearly from the conquest 343. Under a temporary eclipse
    350. Monuments 347.――Sir Richard, trait of, iii. 184 _bis_. Miss 60
    _bis_.――Sir Richard, his siege of Plymouth, raised by Essex, he
    retreated, was followed, re-inforced by the King, iv. 185. Quartered
    with the King at Lord Mohun’s house 186. With other generals hemmed
    in Essex, and obliged him to retire 187. Family 16, 136――i. 262
  Grenville of Bideford, John, sheriff of Devon, ii. 341. Richard 344
  ―――― of Ilcombe, ii. 346
  ―――― of Penheale, George, i. 378.――Degory, ii. 110
  ―――― of Stow, Roger, i. 313. Family 17, 19.――Thomas, sheriff of
    Cornwall, probably the first of Stowe, ii. 341. Family 109, 332
    _bis_. Sir Bernard 22, 162. Sir Bevill 22. His birth and death 162.
    Unhorsed in the battle near Stratton 13. Sir John 172. Family 162
    _bis_
  ―――― of Stowe, Bucks, family, iii. 192, 194
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408
  ―――― Lady, present possessor of Boconock, i. 69. Lord 69, 112
  ―――― Duke of Buckingham, iii. 192
  Greston-moor, iii. 41
  Grey, Thomas, Duke of Dorset, iii. 294. Thomas, Marquis of Dorset
    350. Henry, Duke of Suffolk 294 _bis_. Heir of the family
    140.――Family, i. 383
  ―――― Lord, ii. 197
  Greynville, Rev. Mr. ii. 414
  Gridiron, explanation of St. Lawrence’s, i. 89
  Griffin, Colonel, i. 68
  Griffith, William, ii. 426
  Grills, Charles and Rev. Richard, ii. 394
  Grogith, i. 243, 244
  Grose, Mr. ii. 387
  Gross, Mr. iii. 82
  Grosse, Ezekiel, i. 162. William 136. Family 145, 162――ii.
    217.――Miss, iii. 248. Mr. 383. Family 390. Arms 249
  ―――― of Comborne and Golden, Ezekiel, iii. 212, 215, 243, 361, 406,
    427, 463. His daughter 215, 361, 406, 427, 463 _bis_
  Growden, Lawrence, iii. 175
  Groyne, packet boats from receive their despatches at Falmouth, ii. 11
  Gryllo, Rev. William, i. 288
  Grylls or Garles, rocks at, iii. 23
  ―――― Rev. R. G. i. 128. Matthew and Robert 8.――Alice, ii. 396.
    Charles 227, 396 _ter._ John 396 _bis_. Richard and Rev. Richard
    396. Rev. R. G. 395, 396. Thomas 218. Mrs. 228. Family
    395.――Christopher, iii. 260. Rev. R. G. of St. Neot’s 262, 266.
    Restored the church 262, 264. Rev. Mr. of Luxilian 57. Family
    113――iv. 54
  ―――― of Court, Charles, ii. 395
  ――――  of Helston, Rev. R. G. ii. 124. Thomas 218
  ―――― of Tavistock, William, ii. 395
  ―――― manor, iii. 23
  Guary Mir, or Miracle Plays, iii. 329
  Guavis, William, iii. 284
  Gubbin’s cave, iii. 185
  Guddern, ii. 305. Account of by Hals 300. By Tonkin 303
  ―――― barrow, ii. 305
  Guerir, or Guevor, St. history of, iii. 362
  Guernsey, i. 115, 169.――Lighthouses, ii. 358
  Guilford, ii. 76
  Guillemard, Mary, Philippa Davies, i. 363
  Guinear, i. 355
  Guisors in Normandy, ii. 177
  Gulby, Slade, ii. 114
  Guldeford, Henry, iii. 206
  Gullant, by Leland, iv. 277, 290
  Gully, i. 408
  ―――― of Tresilian, Samuel and Mr. iii. 269
  Gulval parish, ii. 169, 174――iii. 46, 54, 78
  GULVAL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, manor of Laneseley, Als
    family, ii. 118. Gulval well 121. By Tonkin, Lanistley manor,
    Keneggy ibid. Etymology of parish 122. By Editor, St. Gunwall ibid.
    Ancient name, according to Whitaker, impropriation, vicarage,
    Kenegie 123. Trevailer, Rosemorron, fertility of part of the parish
    124. Chiandower, parish feast, history of St. Martin, statistics
    125. Geology by Dr. Boase 126
  ―――― register, ii. 83
  ―――― well, ii. 121
  Gumb, i. 185 _quat._ Daniel, his house cut in a rock 184
  Gundred, iii. 398. Her filial love 393
  ――――’s, St. well, iii. 393
  Gundrons, ii. 121
  Gunhilly, by Leland, iv. 288
  Gunpowder plot, iii. 361
  Gunwall, St. his history by the Editor, ii. 122
  Gunwallo, King, ii. 126
  ―――― parish, i. 118, 301 _bis_, 304――ii. 155――iii. 257
  GUNWALLO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, etymology, ii. 126. Patron, incumbent, land tax, manor
    of Gunwallowinton 127. By Tonkin, circle of stones at Earth ibid. By
    Editor, St. Winwallo ibid. Manor of Winnington (by Lysons),
    situation of church, buried treasure, Mr. Knill 128. Statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 129
  Gunwallowinton manor, ii. 127
  Gunwin, account of, iii. 8
  Guran, i. 415
  Gurlyn, account of, i. 349
  Gurnet’s head, iv. 165
  Gurney, Rev. Samuel, i. 354.――Sir Richard, parish priest of
    Bideford, admonished in his sleep to build Bideford bridge, ii.
    341.――Rev. Samuel of St. Earth and Redruth, iii. 386. Rev. Mr. of
    St. Mervyn 177. Three in succession held St. Mervyns for above a
    century 179.――Rev. Samuel of Tregony, iv. 129
  Gurran parish, iii. 190
  Guthrun the Dane, i. 290
  Guy, Rev. Charles of Padstow, iii. 278
  ―――― Earl of Warwick, iv. 111, 114. His life 113
  Guye, i. 8
  Guzman, Don Felix de, i. 311
  Gwairnick, i. 19
  Gwarnike, i. 16. Two chapels at 17
  Gwatkin, R. L. i. 2――ii. 306 _bis_. Mrs. 306.――Family, i. 2
  Gwavas, Mr. iii. 46. Family 286
  Gwavis, William, iii. 284
  Gweek, ii. 330
  Gwellimore, King of Ireland, i. 326
  Gwenap parish, ii. 123, 222, or Gwennap 144, 306――iii. 306, 380,
    390――iv. 1, 2, 5 _bis_. Mines of 89
  GWENAP parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, ii. 129. Patron, incumbent, land tax, rectory,
    remarkable places, Trefyns 130. St. Dye chapel, Paldy’s mine 131.
    Memorable storm 132. By Tonkin, tumuli at Carne mark, name of
    parish. By Editor, Saints Wenap and Dye 132. St. Dye’s history,
    Cornmarth, excavation at 133. Scornier, its rich mine, Poldice
    mine, copper in tin mines, size of church 134. Alterations,
    Beauchamp monument, tradition of monks in church tower,
    statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase, important mining
    district, beautiful porphyry near Burncoose 136
  Gwenap pit, ii. 133
  Gwendron parish, i. 221, 236――ii. 93, 155, 157, 166 _bis_――iii. 127
    _bis_, 128, 441, 442――iv. 1, 2 _ter._, 137
  GWENDRON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax, remarkable places,
    Trenethike, ii. 137. Nine maids 137. By Tonkin, endowment of
    church, patron, impropriator, Trenithike, name of parish, Bodilly
    Veor, and Vean 137. Treneare 138. By the Editor, former patron
    138. Trenethick, Nansloe, Trelil, parish very productive of tin
    139. Penhallynk monument, vicarage house, parish feast, Mr. Jago a
    magician, statistics 140. Geology by Dr. Boase 141
  Gwenwynwyn ab Nan, i. 338
  Gwernak, by Leland, iv. 262
  Gwiator, Henry, iii. 387
  Gwihter, Henry, iii. 387
  Gwillim’s Heraldry, i. 320
  Gwinear, or Gwyniar, or Guinier parish, i. 160, 344――ii. 145 _bis_,
    225――iii. 339, 344, 345
  GWINEAR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, ii. 141. Impropriator, land tax,
    remarkable places, Lanyon, Polkinhorne, Coswin 142. By Tonkin, name
    142. Impropriation 143. By Editor, productive of copper, Herland
    mine, Whele Alfred, Whele Treliston, Lanyon family 143. Statistics,
    vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, Relistion mine 144
  Gwinnodock, St. iii. 240
  Gwinter, ii. 331 _bis_
  Gwithian bay, ii. 145
  ―――― parish, ii. 234
  GWITHIAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor of Connerton,
    exchanged by Henry 3rd for that of St. James, ii. 145. Form of
    writ, value of benefice, patron, land tax 146. By Tonkin, rectory,
    patron, incumbent, etymology 146. By Editor, advowson, charter of
    Henry 2nd, manor of Conorton 147. Leland’s tradition of a large
    town, exchange of manors contradicted, account of St. James’s
    hospital 148. Lysons’s account of the inundation of sand 149.
    Planting of rushes to arrest it, sand calcareous, difficulty of
    burning it into lime, Godrevy, large fig tree in church-yard,
    parish feast, statistics 150. Geology by Dr. Boase, Godrevy
    point 151
  Gwyn, Mr. ii. 11
  Gwynn, i. 8
  Gwythian parish, ii. 141――iii. 140, 339 _bis_, 344
  Gyges, King, i. 394

  Haccombe, iii. 372. Chantry in ibid.
  ―――― Sir Stephen de, iii. 372
  Hack, John, iii. 387
  Hack and Cast, ii. 113
  Hadham, Edmund of, Earl of Britain and Richmond, iii. 65
  Hadley, John, his sextant, ii. 222
  ―――― in Suffolk, ii. 372
  Hadrian’s mole, iv. 148
  Hagulstadiensis, iv. 42
  Haile’s abbey, Gloucestershire, iii. 284, 285 _bis_
  Hailestown, by Leland, iv. 268
  Hains or Hens Burrow, iii. 394
  Hakewell’s Catalogue of the Speakers, iv. 44
  Haleboate rock, iii. 361
  Halep family, ii. 357
  ―――― of Lammoran, ii. 109
  Haleps family, iii. 215
  Halewyn or Hallwyn, account of, ii. 254
  Half crowns, £10,000 in, i. 265
  Halghland, ii. 430
  Haligan or Helligon, account of, iii. 65
  ―――― Robert de, iii. 66
  Halisworthy hundred, i. 133
  Hall barton, iii. 293――iv. 29, 31
  ―――― Bishop of Exeter, iii. 79. Mr. 280
  ―――― manor, iii. 293.――Account of, ii. 409. Walk at 410
  Hallabeer village, iii. 255
  Hallamore, Mr. ii. 97
  Hallet, Mr. iv. 22
  Hailing, Kent, ii. 152
  Hallton, account of, i. 312, 315
  Hallworthy, iii. 136
  Hals, Dr. i. 298. Lieut.-colonel James 113. John, Bishop of Lincoln
    or Litchfield and Coventry 218. Family 224.――Jane, ii. 119. John
    119, 120 _ter._ Simon 118, 119 _ter._ William 118. Family 118.
    Pedigree 119.――Anne, iii. 188. Grenville 187. Henry, memoir of 187.
    James, governor of Montserrat, taken prisoner at Plymouth 183. His
    life spared, suffered a rigorous imprisonment, verses given to him
    184. His marriage 186, and issue 186, 187. James 186. Wasted his
    property 187. John, Bishop of Lincoln or Litchfield and Coventry
    141. Nicholas 187. Thomas 186. His death 187. Thomas, memoir of
    187――William, the writer of this book, i. 216――ii. 56, 57, 86, 90,
    97, 99 _ter._, 116, 153 _bis_, 143, 147, 148, 163, 199 _bis_, 201,
    238, 256, 269, 273, 274 _bis_, 279, 281, 284, 305, 363, 411――iii.
    187, 62, 66, 90, 106, 126 _quint._, 135, 137, 160, 165, 166 _ter._,
    172, 184, 196, 213, 214 _quat._, 216, 221, 238 _bis_, 398, 432, 433,
    434――iv. 143, 25, 96, 138 _bis_, 139, 165.――His MS. ii. 127. Of
    Ladock parish lost 352.――Upon creeds, iii. 426. His mistakes 352.
    His parochial history 96. The MS. lent to the Editor 407.――Does not
    notice the Scilly Islands, iv. 168. His Cornish vocabulary 37, 39.
    On the vocabulary system 72. Granvill hall 74. The missing portions
    of his MS. sent to the Editor 184.――Family, iii. 208
  Hals of Efford, Anne, i. 221. John 419. Matthew 221. Richard 419.
    Family 298.――John, ii. 130
  ―――― of Efford and Fentongollan, John, i. 125. Sir Nicholas 125 and
    136. Nicholas 39.――Family, ii. 109
  ―――― of Fentongollan, i. 65. John 346, 356. Sir Nicholas 356.――John,
    ii. 170. Sir Nicholas 119, 170. Governor of Pendennis castle,
    sanctioned the building of Falmouth 9. His letters and reasons
    copied 10. Son of John of Efford, and his death 13. Family
    170.――John, iii. 209 _bis_, 212, 215, 464. Sir Nicholas 183, 212,
    215. Captain William, memoir of 183.――John and Sir Nicholas, iv. 2
  ―――― of Hals’s Savannah, Jamaica, Thomas and Major Thomas, ii. 120
  ―――― of Hungerford park, Berks, James, iii. 186
  ―――― of Kenedon, Richard, i. 313, 419――ii. 189――iii. 116
  ―――― of Lelant, i. 144 _ter._
  ―――― of Merthyr, James, i. 205; or Merther, James, ii. 30, 32, 111.
    Martha his wife 111. His eldest son, ii. 32.――Lieut.-col. James,
    iv. 188
  ―――― of Pengersick, Sir Nicholas, obtained a pardon for Lady
    Killigrew, ii. 6
  ―――― of Trembetha, John, iii. 7
  ―――― of Tresawsen, memoir of James, iii. 182
  ―――― of Truro, Grenville, i. 205
  Halse, James, M. P. ii. 271.――James, iii. 91
  Halsey, Rev. Joseph, i. 205.――Family 417. Edward, Joseph, M.D. and
    Nathaniel, iii. 188
  ―――― of Huntingdonshire family, iii. 188. Arms ibid.
  ―――― Rev. Joseph, of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 188 _bis_
  Halsham, Yorkshire, ii. 118
  Halton, i. 311. John de, Bishop of Carlisle 313
  ―――― of Hallton, Joan, i. 313 _bis_. Richard 313
  Halvose, iii. 113
  ―――― John, iii. 181
  Halwell, Sir John, ii. 189.――Family, i. 348
  Halwyn manor, iii. 313
  Ham, John, iv. 18
  Hambley of St. Columb, i. 259
  Hambly, Rev. William, of St. Mewan, iii. 196
  Hamelin, presbyter of Launceston castle chapel, ii. 427
  Hamilton, Duke, i. 66, 67, 68.――Mr. iii. 62
  Hamley, Sir John, ii. 250.――Mr. iii. 65. Family 195. Arms 65
  ―――― of St. Neots, ii. 320
  ―――― of Trebithike, Mr. iv. 95
  Hamly of Trefreke, John, i. 383
  Hamlyn family, ii. 316
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170 _bis_
  Hammett of Carmarthenshire family, iii. 256
  Hammond, Anthony, ii. 76
  Hamm’s castle, Normandy, the Earl of Oxford confined there, ii. 185
  Hamoaze, i. 266――ii. 362――iii. 45, 105, 108 _bis_
  Hampden, John, memorials of, ii. 349. Lord Nugent’s life of 77.――The
    rebel, iii. 144
  Hampshire, ii. 282――iii. 10, 145
  Hamson, Sir Thomas, i. 171
  Hancanon, Richard, i. 215
  Hancock, Rev. Mr. of St. Martin’s, near Looe, iii. 119
  Hancock of Hendreth, William, ii. 68
  ―――― of Pengelly, in Creed, Thomas, iii. 202
  Hankey, Warwick, iv. 157
  ―――― of Trekininge Vean, Joseph, i. 225
  Hans towns, ii. 6
  Hantertavas, account of, iii. 62
  Hardenfast manor, iii. 346
  Hardfast, i. 313
  Hardwicke, Earl of, Chief Justice, i. 269, 282, 283. His charge on
    the western circuit 278
  Hardy, John, ii. 209
  Hare of Trenowith, i. 406. Arms ibid.
  Harewood, i. 158. Sir W. Trelawney lives at, iii. 301
  Harleian MSS. iii. 154 _sex._
  Harlyn, John de, i. 373
  Hamington, Gervase de, iv. 41
  Harold, Edmund, Geoffrey and Thomas, iv. 146
  ―――― King, iii. 130, 142
  Harpsfield, i. 382――iii. 277
  Harrington, a notorious pirate, ii. 41
  ―――― Gervase de, ii. 128
  ―――― of Somersetshire, Miss, ii. 278
  ―――― William Bonville, Lord, iii. 294. Elizabeth, Lady; Lord, of
    Harrington, and his daughter ibid.
  Harris, William, i. 164. Family 197, 365.――Edward and Jane, ii. 304.
    John 58. Mary 416. Richard 255. Susanna 304. William sheriff of
    Cornwall 56. Mr. 416. The celebrated Mr. of Salisbury 103. Rev. Mr.
    253. Arms 122.――W. S. of Plymouth, his writings on lightning, iv.
    130.――Edward, iii. 103. John 82. William 103. Mr. 20. Family 83, 90
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170 _bis_
  ―――― of Hayne, Sir Arthur, ii. 122. William 121, 123.――Sir Thomas,
    iii. 103
  ―――― of Kenegie, William, iii. 85.――In Gulval, ii. 212. Christopher
    121, 123. Lydia 282
  ―――― of Park family, i. 205.――In St. Clement’s, Samuel and Mr. iii. 382
  ―――― of Pickwell, William, i. 244
  ―――― of Roseteague, Richard, ii. 56
  ―――― of Rosewarne in Camburne, ii. 39. Mr. 56
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s, iv. 161
  Harrison, Rev. T. H. ii. 347
  ―――― the historian, ii. 403
  ―――― of Mount Radford, Devon, family, ii. 294
  Harrow school, ii. 243
  Hart, Dr. i. 370.――Family, ii. 255
  Hartland abbey, i. 168.――Devon, ii. 413, 414 _bis_, 415 _bis_――iv.
    155, 156.――Account of, ii. 415. Abbats of 414. Prior of 49 _bis_
  ―――― Galfrid de Dynham, Lord of, iv. 156
  Hartley Winchcombe, i. 164. Henry Winchmore, ii. 56. Winchmore 139
  Harvey, Mr. i. 254.――John, iii. 341 _bis_, and his son 341
  Harwich, ii. 28
  Harwood in Calstock, ii. 230
  Hastings, a cinque port, ii. 38. Enlarged 45.――Sands, iii. 10
  ―――― family, iii. 234, 353――iv. 136 _bis_, 143
  ―――― Earl of Huntingdon, i. 378 _bis_
  Hatch, Samuel, i. 275. Family 270, 271, 274
  Hatsell’s Parliamentary Precedents, i. 356
  Hatt, i. 105
  Haulsey, Elizabeth, i. 399. John 400
  Haweis, David and Edward, ii. 307. Reginald 307 _bis_.――David, iii.
    382. Reginald 327 _bis_. Family 382, 383
  ―――― of Kelliow, Reginald, iii. 381. Mr. 382
  Hawes, John, iii. 387.――Mr. iv. 74. Family 4
  ―――― of Carlyan, ii. 302
  ―――― of Chincoos, Thomas, ii. 316. Arms 316
  ―――― of Kea, ii. 316 _bis_
  ―――― of Killiow, John, his arms, ii. 300
  Hawke, Mr. iv. 111
  Hawker, Rev. Jacob, iv. 19
  Hawkey, Joseph, ii. 415. Family 152.――Miss, iii. 116.――Joseph, iv. 139
  ―――― of St. Colomb, Joseph, ii. 253, 254
  ―――― of Trevego, Martha and Reginald, iii. 187
  ―――― of St. Wenowe, ii. 90
  Hawkins, i. 54, 243, 391, 407. Christopher 357 _bis_, 358, 364. Sir
    Christopher 8, 46, 258, 358, 392, 403. Henry 45, 259 _ter._ Jane
    357. John 274, 275, 357 _quat._ John and John Heywood 358. Dr. John
    417. Rev. John and Joseph 259. Mary 357, 364. Philip 357 _ter._
    Thomas 356, 357 _quat._, 358. Rev. Mr. of Blissland 259. Family 54,
    243, 391, 407. Arms 45.――Sir Christopher, ii. 148, 354, 358. His
    opinion of Ictis 20, 206. Rev. Mr. 258, 260. Family 281.――Sir
    Christopher, iii. 271 _bis_, 423. His discovery and working of a
    lead and silver mine 272. John 270. Rev. John, D.D. 268, 381. Of
    Pennance 356, 362. Rev. Dr. 196. Mary 367. Philip 268, 271, 354,
    356, 367. Rev. Mr. of Sithney 441. Mr. a pupil of Dr. Borlase 53.
    Mr. his paper on Geology 100. Family 197, 363.――Rev. Mr. Towednack,
    iv. 53. Family 161
  Hawkins of St. Austell, Barbara and Henry, i. 376. Grace 419, 422.
    Henry 419, 423
  ―――― of Creed, i. 45, 346, 387
  ―――― of Gonrounson, i. 392. Philip 387
  ―――― of Helston, i. 45. John 260 _bis_.――Thomas, iii. 113
  ―――― of Pennance, Ann and Barbara, i. 259, 260. Elizabeth 55, 259,
    260. George 259. Gertrude and Grace 260. Henry 259 _ter._ Jane 259.
    John 255, 260. John, D.D. 257, 259 _bis_. Mary 259 _bis_. Philip 55,
    255 _bis_, 257, 259 _bis_, 350. Arms 255.――Ann and Philip, ii. 242.
    Family 217
  ―――― of Pennemer, John, D.D. i. 418
  ―――― of Penzance, Mary, iii. 136
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 356, 364, 366 _bis_. Christopher 259, 350.
    Thomas 346 _bis_, 349, 356, 357. Arms 349.――Christopher, iii. 136,
    196. Christopher of Helston and 367. Jane 136.――In St. Earth, and
    Trewithan in Probus, Sir Christopher, ii. 217
  ―――― of Trewithan, Christopher, iii. 368 _bis_. Henry and John 368.
    Philip 368 _bis_. Thomas 362, 368 _ter._ Miss 368
  Hawksley, Rev. J. W. of Redruth, iii. 390
  Hawkyns, Sir John, iv. 86
  Hawley, ii. 292. Dr. 233
  ―――― of Dartmouth, John, ii. 294
  Hawtys Brygge, iv. 255
  Hay, i. 187. Account of 411――ii. 353, 354
  Haydon, Mr. schoolmaster at Leskeard, iii. 18. Determined the
    longitude of Leskeard 19
  Hayford haven, iii. 74, 110
  Hayle, i. 359, 364 _bis_――ii. 83, 214
  ―――― causeway, iii. 386
  ―――― harbour, improved, iii. 341
  ―――― parish, iii. 339, 342, 343
  ―――― port of, ii. 261, 264
  ―――― river, i. 344, 350, 359, 377――iii. 5, 6, 125, 128, 339, 426.
    Estuary of 5, 11
  Hayleford channel, i. 236
  Hayman, Richard, iv. 18
  Hayme, Isabel, iii. 324. John 315, 324
  Hayne, in Devon, ii. 122 bis
  ―――― of Treland, John, ii. 320
  Haynes burrow, ii. 1
  Headon village, iv. 41
  Heale, Mr. ii. 151, 228, 319.――Miss, iv. 129――Family, i. 28, 107,
    177. Arms 107
  ―――― of Battlesford, ii. 137
  ―――― or Hele of Benetts, Edmund, iv. 152. George and Lucy 152, 154.
    Warwick 154. Name and arms 152
  ―――― of Brading, Lucy, ii. 235
  ―――― of Devon, Ellis, iii. 234
  ―――― of Fleet, Honor, and Sir Thomas, iii. 225. Family 211
  ―――― of Wembury, i. 65
  Hearle, Dr. James, and Rev. Mr. i. 298. Family, ib.――ii. 99, 270
  ―――― of Buryan, i. 359, 360
  ―――― of Penryn, John, i. 423.――Mr. ii. 97. Mr. worked Poldice mine,
    and possessed one third of the lands 134. Mr. the last of Penryn 99.
    Family 354.――Betty, iii. 440. Thomas 303. Family 8
  Hearn, ii. 186
  Hearne, i. 307――iii. 332
  ――――’s Appendix to Adam de Domerham, iv. 26
  Heart, Dr. Robert, ii. 151. His arms 152.――Family, iii. 391
  ―――― of St. Germans, ii. 152
  ―――― of Manhyniet, ii. 152
  ―――― of Tencreek family, ii. 152
  Heckens family, iii. 83. Richard, of St. Ives 88
  Hector, iii. 417, 418 _bis_, 420
  Hedgeland, J. P. iii. 264 _bis_
  Hedgeland’s prints of St. Neot’s windows, ii. 396
  Hedingham castle, Essex, iii. 424
  Hedui, i. 107
  Hele family, iii. 250, and heiress, iv. 136
  ―――― of Boscome, Devon, Rebecca and Thomas, iii. 297
  Helen, Empress of Rome, i. 237
  Helena, St. iii. 187.――Mother of Constantine, ii. 153. A monastery
    built by 37
  ―――― St. island, Dr. Maskelyne’s voyage to, ii. 222
  Helfon harbour, i. 38
  Helford channel, iii. 124
  ―――― river, i. 242――iii. 63, 126 _bis_, 127, 138
  ―――― village, iii. 113
  Helie, i. 2
  Heligan, ii. 126
  Heligon, i. 424. Account of 419
  Heliotropium corymbosum, iv. 182
  Hella in Camburne, ii. 141
  Hellanclose, account of, i. 293
  Helland parish, i. 60――ii. 340――iii. 64, 74
  HELLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquities,
    value, patron, land-tax, incumbent, Bocunyan, ii. 151. Barton of
    Helland, etymology of the word barton 152. By Tonkin, etymology 152.
    Saint, Gifford family 153. By Editor, etymology of barton,
    Penhargard manor, Broads barton, Glynn family 153. Statistics,
    rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 154
  Hellas river, ii. 330
  Helldon rectory, Norfolk, ii. 152
  Hellegar manor, account of, i. 264
  ―――― of Hellegar, Sibill, and arms, i. 265
  Hellesbury park, ii. 402.――Helsbury, iii. 223
  Helleston lake, iii. 442
  ―――― manor, iii. 442 _bis_
  Hellman, Miss, iii. 191
  Hellnoweth, nunnery at, iii. 126
  Helston borough, account of, ii. 156. First charter 158. Payment of
    rates 159. Patron, former representatives, letter on the reform as
    affecting it 160. Hospital of St. John 136, 137, 163. A coinage
    town 301. Coinage hall 163. Agreeable society, market house 164.
    Foray, and practice of bowling 165. Road to 215. Alexander
    Pendarves, burgess for 98. Etymology 158. Corporation 8,
    9.――Burgesses of, iii. 15. Road to Falmouth from 63. William Noye,
    attorney-general, M.P. for 152. John Rogers, M.P. 445.――Road from
    Truro to, iv. 4
  Helston castle, iv. 228
  ―――― church, ii. 136 _bis_, 192――iii. 384
  ―――― and Kerrier hundred, i. 38
  ―――― manor, i. 74
  ―――― manor in Kerrier, ii. 137, 401, and its stannaries 155
  ―――― in Trigg, ii. 137, 401, 404――iii. 223
  ―――― parish, i. 1, 3, 77, 115, 123, 136, 153, 356――ii. 140――iii. 47,
    127 _bis_, 128, 421, 441, 442, 443, 446 _ter._――iv. 6
  HELSTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor in Alfred’s
    days, a coinage town _temp._ Edward 1st, privileges, ii. 155. Form
    of writ, Castle-Werre, arms of the borough, Edward 1st frequented it
    for pleasure 156. Chief inhabitants, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, thunder-storm 157. By Tonkin, hospital ibid. By
    Editor, etymology, contest for elective franchise, first charter
    158. Payment of rates, election petition 159. Heraldic visitation,
    patron, representatives of borough, Reform Bill 160. Letter upon
    161. Church injured by a storm, new church, St. John’s hospital,
    removal of the coinage hall 163. Agreeable society, annual festival
    164. The foray 165. Musical air preserved from the British, and
    found in Scotland and in Ireland, statistics, and Geology by Dr.
    Boase 166
  ―――― tenants, i. 75
  ―――― village, ii. 405
  ―――― Chaumond manor, iii. 442
  Helvetians, i. 107
  Helya, prior of Glastonbury, iv. 27
  Helyar, Weston, iv. 9
  ―――― of East Coker, Somersetshire, Rachel, iii. 165. Weston 165
    _bis_, 346. Family 346
  Hemley of Trefreke, John and arms, i. 384
  Hendarsike, etymology, iv. 22
  Hender, i. 369, 370
  Hender, Elizabeth, iii. 233. John 233, 234 _bis_. Family, monuments
    to 233
  Hendersick, lands of, iii. 294
  Hendower family, iii. 198
  ―――― of Court family, heiress of, ii. 109 _bis_
  Hendra, his dream, ii. 300
  ―――― or Hendre, account of, i. 234――ii. 68
  Hendrawne, iii. 327
  Hendre, Mr. iii. 354
  Henemerdon, William de, iii. 428
  Hengar, account of, iv. 94, 98
  Hengist, i. 326 _bis_
  Hengiston Downs, iv. 6.――Abound with tin, lines upon, and a battle
    at, ii. 310
  Henlyn, iii. 177, 178. Possessors of 176, 177
  Hennaclive cliff, its height, iv. 18
  Hennah, Rev. Mr. of St. Austell, iv. 167
  Hennock vicarage, ii. 224
  Hennot, ii. 274
  Henrietta Maria, Queen, i. 398
  Henry 5th, Emperor, iii. 28
  ―――― 1st, King, i. 296――ii. 148, 239, 249――iii. 140, 332, 456, 462,
    463,――iv. 77, 82 _bis_, 169.――His daughter, i. 296
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 87, 147, 155, 170, 249, 415, 422, 426――iii. 139, 140,
    225――iv. 71, 81 _bis_, 82 _bis_, 84, 140
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 69, 89, 95, 118 _bis_, 119, 130, 145 _bis_, 149, 235,
    249, 403, 422――iii. 14, 15, 27, 140, 149, 268, 269, 316, 438――iv.
    15, 105 _bis_, 128.――His charter to Launceston Priory, ii. 426
  ―――― 4th, ii. 93, 107, 180, 235, 260 _ter._, 282, 394, 398――iii. 14,
    22, 27 _bis_, 66, 111, 117, 125, 129, 132, 134, 140, 225, 226, 302,
    307, 323, 374, 437, 438――iv. 16, 22, 43 _bis_, 44 _bis_, 68, 96,
    102, 112, 139, 153
  ―――― 5th, ii. 176 _bis_, 209, 212, 302, 386――iii. 7, 101 _bis_, 111,
    141, 269, 303, 316, 374, 436. Statue of 295――iv. 13, 101, 138, 143,
    144, 145 _bis_
  ―――― 6th, i. 169――ii. 39, 71, 89, 107, 149, 153, 182 _quat._, 183
    _bis_, 209, 235, 251, 260 _bis_, 299, 315, 335, 353, 354――iii. 101,
    116 _ter._, 141, 147, 255 _bis_, 294, 318, 323, 324 _bis_, 459――iv.
    43, 101, 132, 139, 141, 145 _bis_, 146, 156
  ―――― 7th, ii. 2, 43, 100, 108 _ter._, 109 _bis_, 114, 185, 186
    _bis_, 187, 188, 189, 190 _bis_, 191 _ter._, 235, 317, 335, 341,
    363, 386――iii. 27, 65 _bis_, 101, 102 _ter._, 103 _quat._, 104,
    134, 141, 177, 182, 193, 199, 213, 226, 324, 370, 393, 436――iv.
    45, 72, 161.――Insurrection to depose, i. 86.――Gothic architecture
    of his time, iv. 81
  Henry 8th, ii. 53, 66, 70, 71, 72, 76, 87, 91, 94, 96, 109, 113, 119
    _bis_, 123, 139, 149, 157, 163, 169, 170, 171 _bis_, 176, 185, 191,
    194, 209, 235, 259, 275, 276, 277, 327, 335, 341 _ter._, 412, 414
    _bis_, 415, 420――iii. 7, 44, 90, 103 _quat._, 104, 105, 111, 133,
    134 _bis_, 139, 147, 148, 155, 158, 163, 170 _bis_, 181, 199
    _quat._, 206, 208, 210, 211, 214, 232, 238, 253, 278, 286 _bis_,
    317, 326, 370, 417, 437, 441, 446, 453, 459, 460――iv. 9, 15, 42, 57,
    68, 69, 72, 73, 97, 101, 112, 113 _bis_, 134, 155, 156, 161.――Built
    St. Mawe’s castle, tradition of, ii. 280. A frigate sunk in his
    sight near Portsmouth 342
  ―――― Prince, iii. 14
  ―――― Prince, son of the Conqueror, ii. 211 _bis_
  ―――― Prince of Wales, iii. 27, 213.――Farnaby dedicated his Horace
    to, iv. 87
  Hensall Cove, ii. 360
  Henshinius, iii. 332
  Henwood, Mr. iii. 100.――Family, i. 420
  ―――― of Lavalsa, Hugh, i. 421
  Herald’s office, iii. 316――iv. 77
  ―――― visitation, iii. 83――iv. 106
  Heraldic visitations, ii. 338, 423
  Heraldry, extract from Upton’s MS. upon, ii. 107
  Herbert, Lady Catherine, i. 265――Jane, ii. 107. John 160 _ter._
    William, Earl of Pembroke 107
  ―――― of Cherbury, Lord, ii. 348
  Herbert’s Festivity of Saints, i. 407
  Hercules, i. 341.――Breaking the horn of Achelous, ii. 161.――Pillars
    of, iv. 168
  Hereford, Stanbury, Bishop of, iii. 255
  ―――― Cathedral, ii. 33
  ―――― and Essex, Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of, i. 63
  Herland, copper mine, i. 226――ii. 143
  Herle family, i. 125, 394, 397.――Sir John the younger, and Polglass,
    iii. 294.――Mr. iv. 74. Family 107
  Herle of Landew, Edward, his character, Mary, Nicholas, Northmore,
    his death, iii. 41. Northmore 42
  ―――― of Prideaux, Edward, iii. 41 _ter._――Family, i. 397
  Herme, St. i. 393. His history 393
  ―――― St. parish, i. 202――ii. 5
  Hernecroft in Stratton, iii. 133
  Heron, Rev. John, of Stoke Climsland, iv. 7
  Herring, Major, J. B. i. 380. His grandson 381
  Hertford, Edward Seymour, Earl of, and Duke of Somerset, iv. 107
  Hertfordshire, ii. 64, 65
  Hertland, recluse of, iv. 158
  Hervey, Rev. Mr. composed his Meditations while curate of
    Kilkhampton, ii. 352
  Herygh, St. iii. 7 _bis_
  Herys of Herys, Henry and family, iii. 202
  Hesse Cassel, Landgrave of, his bargain for letting out troops, ii. 269
  Hessenford, road from Duloe to, iv. 30
  Hewish, Matilda de, iv. 112
  Hexham, battle of, ii. 260
  ―――― cathedral, iv. 43
  ―――― diocese, iv. 42
  ―――― shire, iv. 42, 43
  Hext, Samuel, and arms, i. 44. Mr. 45.――Francis, ii. 393. Rev. F. J.
    154――iii. 66. Nicholas 83
  Hexworthy barton, account of, iii. 2
  Heydon, Mr. an ornament to the country, ii. 388
  Heyes, Thomas, i. 9
  Heylston, by Leland, iv. 288
  Heywood, Anne and James, i. 347.――Sir John’s Chronicle, ii. 198――i. 339
  Hickens, Mr. ii. 124
  ―――― of Poltair, Mr. iii. 91
  Hickes, Cloberry, i. 23. Family 368.――Mr. ii. 259――iv. 74
  ―――― of Trevithick, John, i. 416. His father poisoned ibid. Stephen,
    accidentally shot 417
  Hickman, Mr. iv. 74
  Hicks, i. 61, 62.――Mr. iv. 68
  ―――― of Trenedick, John, iii. 44
  Hicks’s Mill village, iii. 38
  Hidrock, St. ii. 379 _bis_
  Hieroglyphicks of the Druids, i. 192
  Higden, Ralph, his Polychronicon, iii. 163
  Highlands, iii. 240
  Hilarius, Bishop of Poictiers, ii. 338
  Hilary point, i. 295
  ―――― St. i. 294, 395. Bishop of Poictiers 295 _ter._――His history,
    ii. 167
  ―――― or Hillary, St. parish, i. 88, 344, 355――ii. 80, 118, 307――iii.
    46, 306, 312.――vicar of, ii. 144
  HILARY, ST. parish, Hals’s history of the saint, ii. 167. By Hals,
    situation, boundaries, name, value of benefice 169. Tregumbo,
    Treveneage, borough of Marazion, ancient name, situation, Lord,
    court leet, member of parliament, franchise neglected, fair and
    markets 170. Land tax, French invaded, and took Mount’s Bay, burnt
    the town, and fled, defeated at sea 171. History of St. Michael’s
    Mount, former name, description 172. Lines upon, pilgrimages
    performed to, disruption from main land, submarine trees, spring
    173. Another spring, prospect from the top, Porth-horne, priory 174.
    Revenues, chapel, Michael’s chair, tombstones, solidity of the roof
    175. Built of Irish oak, proprietors, privileges, fairs, roads for
    anchorage, landing of Sir Robert Knollys 176. Seized by Pomeroy, his
    confederacy with Prince John 177. Stabs the messenger sent to arrest
    him, enters St. Michael’s mount by stratagem 178. Richard’s return,
    John’s submission 179. Pomeroy surrenders, and dies, Richard
    garrisons the mount 180. Vere family, dispute between the Lords
    spiritual and temporal 181. Wars of the Roses 182. Perkin Warbeck’s
    rebellion 186. Siege of Exeter 189. Priory of St. Michael’s mount
    191. Murder of Edward the 6th’s commissioner, Arundell’s rebellion
    192. Terms sent to the King 194. His answer 195. Second siege of
    Exeter 196. Sir Anthony Kingston, provost marshall 197. Church and
    house struck by a ball of fire, wonderful escape of Mr. St. Aubyn
    Whitaker’s name of the place 199. And etymology, nunnery 200.
    Leland’s notice of it 201. Church built by Edward the Confessor 202.
    The chair 204. Its use 205. History of the mount by Editor, the
    Ictis of Siculus, earliest tradition of the church, lofty situations
    dedicated to the archangel, St. Kenna imparts virtue to the chair
    206. St. Kenna’s well, Keynsham, ammonites at, supposed ancient site
    of the mount, subterranean trees 207. Dugdale’s account 208.
    Oliver’s notices, and tanners, St. Edward’s charter 209. Earl of
    Morton’s 210. King of the Romans 211. Pope Adrian’s bull,
    suppression of the monastery, proprietor since 212. Saint Aubyns
    have improved it, geological description 213. Description of the
    buildings, pier, connection of the mount with romances 214.
    Antiquity and history of Marazion 215. Considerable families there
    216. Treveneage, Tregembo 217. Tregurtha, Ennis, Trevarthen 218.
    Mines, church and its monuments 219. Mr. Palmer a recusant 220. Mr.
    Hitchins 221. Dr. Maskelyne’s astronomical voyage to St. Helena,
    Meyer’s astronomical tables 222. Nautical Almanack 223. Family of
    Mr. Hitchens 224. Parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    also of St. Michael’s mount 225
  Hilary, St. term, ii. 120, 334
  Hilda, St. petrified serpents, ii. 298
  Hill, Otwell, i. 46. Family 31, 210.――Sampson and his arms, ii. 136.
    Mr. 11.――Alan, iii. 193. Candia and Grace 191. Otwell 191, 193. His
    arms 191. Rev. Mr. of St. Maben 65.――Richard, iv. 77
  ―――― of Carwithenack, i. 241
  ―――― of Constantine, ii. 139
  ―――― of Croan, John and Michael, i. 371
  ―――― of Lancashire family, iii. 191
  ―――― of Lydcote family, iii. 252
  ―――― of Shilston, Oliver, i. 348
  ―――― of Trenethick family, and John, ii. 139
  HILL, NORTH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, principal seats,
    Trebatha, ii. 226. Battin 227. By Editor, Trebartha 228. Treveniel,
    patron, rector, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 229
  HILL, SOUTH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    ii. 229. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, Manaton
    230. By Tonkin, name, patron, incumbents, Kellyland manor, Manaton
    ibid. By Editor, Whitaker’s etymology of Manaton, proprietors
    of Kalliland, patron, church, rector, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 231
  Hillman, Rev. Mr. of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 208.――Rev. Mr. iv. 1
  Hills, the highest in Cornwall, i. 132
  Hilton manor, iii. 117 _bis_
  Hingston downs, i. 152 _bis_, 159――ii. 23. Kitt hill, the most
    elevated point of 312
  ―――― hill, i. 189
  Hippesley, Cox, John and Frances Susanna, ii. 250
  Hippia frutescens, iv. 182
  Hitchens, i. 282.――Rev. Malachi, ii. 144, 221, 224, 225. The
    Editor’s notices concerning 221. Filled the office of astronomer
    royal in Dr. Maskelyne’s absence 222. Assisted in compiling the
    Nautical Almanack 223. His family, Rev. Richard, Rev. Thomas,
    Malachy, Fortescue, Josepha 224. Mr. 259, 261.――Rev. Mr. of St.
    Hilary, iii. 34. Family 286
  ―――― of Trungle, Mr. iii. 288
  Hiwis family, ii. 256.――Emmeline and family, iv. 16
  Hoare, Sir Richard, i. 305
  Hoarn, iii. 403
  Hobart, Lord, ii. 361. Family 362.――Lord, iii. 5, 405
  Hobbs, i. 18, 78――ii. 57. Nicholas and his arms 54.――Rev. Thomas,
    iii. 213. William 355
  Hobby, Sir Thomas, married a dau. of Sir Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Hoblin, Mr. ii. 143
  Hoblyn, i. 45. Edward 216. John 107. Robert 216. Thomas 223.――Rev.
    Carew, iii. 136. Rev. Edward of Milor 231. Mary 136. Robert 347.
    Rev. Robert 77, 445. Family 192, 197, 445
  ―――― of Bodman, i. 172, 224, 371;――or Hoblin Bridget, ii. 389
  ―――― of Bradridge, ii. 57
  ―――― of Croan, i. 371. Damaris, Edward 376 _bis_. Of Crone, Damaris
    and Edward 260
  ―――― of Egleshayle, i. 224
  ―――― of St. Enedor, i. 224
  ―――― of Gurran, i. 224
  ―――― of Helland, i. 224
  ―――― of Kenwyn, John, i. 224
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 223
  ―――― of Nanswhiddon, i. 160, 161, 223, 371. Anne, Carew 224. Edward
    223. Francis, Grace, John, and Mary 224. Richard 223. Robert 210,
    226, 223 _bis_. Rev. Robert 223, 226. Thomas 224. Arms 223.――Family,
    ii. 113――Edward and Richard, iii. 191. Robert 191, 196 _bis_
  ―――― of Penhale, i. 292
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s, i. 225
  ―――― of Tregleagh, i. 371
  ―――― of Trewheler, Edward, i. 387
  Hocken, Rev. William, of Phillack, iii. 343, 344
  Hocker, Rev. Mr. ii. 413.――Rev. William, of St. Mewan, iii.
    198.――Thomas, iv. 3. Mr. 4 _bis_
  ―――― of Trewanta, William, iii. 39
  Hockin, Miss, ii. 221.――Mr. iii. 223. Mr. of Gwithian 344
  Hockyn of Helland and Helston, iv. 95
  Hoddy of Pennance, Henry, i. 257
  Hodgson, Rev. Charles of St. Tudy, iv. 97
  Hoe, the, iii. 108
  Holcomb, Mr. iii. 211, 212, 215
  Holden, i. 410.――Rev. Mr. ii. 232
  Holinshed, i. 108, 246
  Holland, ii. 52, 270. Coast of 28. Peace of England and France with
    42. War with 245. Tobacco sold cheap in 42.――States of, iii. 186
  ―――― of Devon, family, ii. 304
  ―――― John, Earl of Huntingdon, i. 341.――Thomas, Earl of Kent, and
    Thomas, Duke of Surrey, iii. 27
  ―――― parish, i. 264
  Hollis of Houghton, Notts., Densill Lord Hollis; Gilbert and John,
    Earls of Clare, iii. 148. Sir William, ancestor of the Duke of
    Newcastle 147 _bis_
  Holrode, Eggerus de, ii. 426, 427
  Holwell, Rev. William of Menheneot, iii. 171 _bis_. His collection
    of pictures 171. His marriage and death 172. Rev. William of
    Thornberry, Glouc. and his works 171
  Holy hearth, iii. 90
  ―――― land, iv. 43
  ―――― Trinity churchyard, i. 134
  ―――― Trinity, knights of, i. 338
  ―――― war, ii. 177――iii. 129, 132――iv. 43
  ―――― well in Roach, iii. 393
  Holyhead, i. 295
  Holywell, i. 291. Description of 292
  Homer, iii. 417, 418, 420. Mr. Peters’s Vindication of 68. Holwell’s
    Beauties of 171. A curious translation from 418. Pope’s 420.
    Compared 171.――Macpherson’s, ii. 406
  Homer well, iv. 35
  Honey, Mr. iii. 20
  Honorius, Pope, iii. 284
  Hoo, Baron, i. 224
  ―――― of Hoo, William, i. 224
  Hooker, i 108, 325. Richard 283. Robert 162 _bis_.――Mr. ii. 157, 420
  ―――― Zachariah, of St. Michael Carhayes, iii. 203. His arms 203
  ―――― of Trelisick, in St. Ewe, William and Miss, ii. 279
  Hope, Mr. i. 321
  Hopton, Lord, i. 44. Sir Ralph 113.――King Charles’s general, ii. 343
   _bis_.――iii. 17, 183, 184. Lord, the royalist general 81.
    Surrendered to Fairfax with 5000 men 189.――Sir Ralph, iv. 13, 14
    _bis_. Lord 14. His ancestor 14
  ―――― in the Hole, co. Salop, given to the Norman hunter, whose
    posterity took the name, iv. 15
  Hoquart, a French naval commander, iii. 218
  Horace, translation of, iii. 218.――Farnaby’s, iv. 87
  Horatius, a Roman tragedy, iv. 97
  Hore, of Trenowth, in St. Ewan, ii. 335
  Horestone or Orestone, iv. 28
  Hornacott manor, iv. 39, 41. A free chapel there 39
  ―――― family, iv. 41
  Horsey, Joan and Sir John, i. 65
  Horsham, Sussex, iv. 87
  Horsley, i. 183 _ter._
  Horton, prior of Launceston, ii. 419
  Hosatus or Husey, Henry, iii. 206
  Hosea, reference to, i. 80
  Hosken, Rev. Mr. ii. 89
  Hoskin, i. 364. Jochebed 363.――Rev. Mr. ii. 149 _bis_, 150. Henry 8.
    Miss, of Looe 249. Mr. and his son, Rev. Mr. mistook Schist for gold
    ore 21. Family 8.――Mr. of Whitstone, iv. 152
  ―――― of Gwithian family, and Rev. Richard, ii. 147
  ―――― of Hellanclose, i. 293. Joseph 293
  Hoskins, James, iii. 358.――Rev. Nicholas, of Boyton, and Rev.
    Nicholas of Whitstone, iv. 153. John, of East Looe, and his dau. 37
  Hospital of St. James and of St. John at Bridgewater, ii. 412; and
    of St. John Baptist, at Helston 136
  Houghter, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  House of Lords, iii. 405
  Houses, foundations of, discovered under sand, iii. 6
  Hoveden, Roger, ii. 60, 180. His Chronicle 310
  Howard, Elizabeth, and Sir John, ii. 181.――Thomas, Duke of Norfolk,
    iii. 293――Sir Charles, iv. 41
  Howeis, ii. 159
  ―――― of Redruth, and Killiou, Edward, John, Reginald, Mr. arms, ii. 304
  Howell, i. 108.――Rev. Joshua, ii. 400. Mr. 142. Rev. Mr. universally
    esteemed 104.――David, iii. 337. Rev. Mr. of Pelynt 291.――Rev. Mr.
    iv. 29. Mr. 114
  Howlett, Sir Ralph, married a dau. of Sir Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Howse, Richard, ii. 189
  Hoya carnosa, iv. 182
  Hoyle, copper works at, iii. 343. Iron works 305. Trade of 343
  Hucarius, the Levite, ii. 62
  Huckmore, Miss, ii. 230
  Huddy, i. 243.――Family, iii. 355
  ―――― of Nethoway, i. 257
  Hudson, the botanist, ii. 331――iii. 173
  Hugh, St. history of, i. 414. Miracles done at his shrine 415
  Hugh, St. de Quedyock, parish and church, iii. 373
  Hughes, Rev. Mr. i. 258
  Huish, ii. 292
  Hull, ii. 76
  Hume, Lord, ii. 9
  Humphrey, i. 161
  Hungerford, Robert, Lord, ii. 397.――Elizabeth, Francis, Katharine,
    Mary, Sir Robert, and heiress, iii. 234. Family 353――iv. 136 _bis_, 143
  ―――― of Penheale, i. 378 _bis_
  Hunkin, John, iii. 16 _bis_
  Hunt, George, i. 101
  Hunt of Lanhidrock, George, ii. 381. George 382, 387. His taste 382
  ―――― of Mellington, Cheshire, Thos. ii. 381
  Hunter, the Norman, his posterity called Hopton, iv. 15
  Huntingdon, ii. 76
  ―――― John Holland, Earl of, i. 341
  Huntingdonshire, i. 369
  Hurlers, i. 178, 179, 183 _bis_, 184 _bis_, 187――iii.
    45.――Descriptions of, i. 184, 196
  Hurling at St. Merryn, iii. 179
  Hurricane, November 1783, i. 318
  Hurris, iii. 202
  Hurston, i. 116
  Hussey, Richard, his Life, and Mary his widow, ii. 34. John 382,
    383. Peter 358.――Rev. John of Okehampton, Devon, iv. 90. Father of
    Richard 89. His death 90
  Hutton, George, iii. 144
  Hy or Iä, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Hy-Conalls, county of, in Ireland, iii. 434
  Hyde, Thomas de la, i. 340.――Edward Earl of Clarendon, iii. 351.
    Advised the imprisonment of Sir Richard Grenville, and gives a very
    unamiable character of him, ii. 345
  Hydrangea hortensis, iv. 182
  Hydrock, St. ii. 383
  Hylesbery castle, iv. 228
  Hypericum monogynum, iv. 182
  Hythe, a cinque port, ii. 38
  Hywis family, ii. 400

  Iä, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Iceland, i. 336
  Ictam island, ii. 4
  Ictis supposed to be St. Michael’s Mount, ii. 20
  Ida or Ide, St. iii. 334
  Idalberga, St. iii. 33
  Ide, St. manor of, ii. 256
  Ideless, de, family, ii. 316
  Igerne, Duchess of Cornwall, i. 327, 329, 330 _ter._, 331, 332
    _sex._
  Ilcombe, account of, ii. 346
  Ilfracombe, i. 131
  Ilia, an Irish saint, ii. 257
  Iliad, iii. 420
  Illigan, Illogan, Illugan or Illiggan parish, i. 160――ii. 380, 388,
    389 _bis_――iii. 145――iv. 128.――Living of, ii. 243――iii. 239
  Illogan parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ii. 234. Lordship of Tyhiddy, Basset
    family 235. Angove family 236. Carne Bray, Carne Kye 237. By Tonkin,
    Tehidy, Carnekie tinwork Nance 238. Tehidy 239. By Editor,
    etymology, St. Illuggen, Tehidy 240. Menwinnion copper mine, and
    populousness of the parish, iron tram-road, commenced by Lord
    Dunstanville on the jubilee 241. Basset family 242. Memoir of Lord
    de Dunstanville 243. Nautical affairs after the seven years’ war
    246. French Revolution 247. Peerage conferred on Sir F. Basset, his
    private character 249. Parish, statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 250
  Illuggen, St. ii. 240
  Impropriation of benefices, the first in England, iii. 114. Present
    number 115
  Inceworth manor, account of, iii. 105
  Index to Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, iv. 381
  Index Rhetoricus and Oratoricus, iv. 87
  India, iii. 187, 188 _bis_, 218.――Mr. Cole distinguished as an
    engineer in, iv. 9
  ――――, East, college, iii. 95
  ――――, East company, iii. 188
  ―――― fleet, iii. 187. Ship 187
  Indian Queens, i. 227 _bis_
  Ingangén, St. village, ii. 385
  Ingham, John de, i. 246
  Ingulphus, Abbot of Croyland, i. 240
  Inis Alga, iv. 67
  Inis Cathaig, iii. 434
  Iniscaw island, by Leland, iv. 266
  Inispriven, by Leland, iv. 287
  Inkpen family, iii. 346
  Inlet, ii. 430
  Inney river, iv. 70
  Innis, account of, i. 396; or Enys, ii. 93
  Innocent 3rd, Pope, i. 110, 312――iv. 36
  ―――― 4th, i. 176
  ―――― 5th, Pope, i. 110
  Inns of court, ii. 71
  Inquisition, i. 312, 315. Establishment of 311
  Inquisition of Oliver Sutton Bishop of Lincoln, and John de
    Pontifexia Bishop of Winchester, into the value of Cornish
    benefices, i. 16, 22, 32, 38, 42, 52, 60, 63, 107, 112, 115, 118,
    129, 135, 167, 174, 197, 202, 209, 213, 230, 236, 246, 253, 261,
    289, 294, 301, 304, 311, 316, 323, 344, 367, 377, 383, 386, 393,
    404, 407, 409, 413――ii. 36, 49, 59, 80, 86, 89, 92, 106, 118, 126,
    129, 141, 146, 151, 157, 169, 226, 230, 232, 234, 240, 251, 253,
    257, 273, 275, 282, 291, 299, 309, 315, 319, 332, 340, 354――iii. 60,
    64, 75, 78, 101, 110, 118, 124, 128, 139, 161, 168, 176, 182, 190,
    195, 198, 208, 222, 224, 237, 391, 402, 419, 421, 425, 428, 436,
    441, 448, 456, 462――iv. 1, 7, 12, 19, 43, 48, 50, 52, 61, 63, 66,
    70, 93, 99, 110, 116, 124, 128, 131, 137, 152, 155, 160, 161
  Inquisition, Wolsey’s, i. 22, 28, 32, 38, 42, 52, 61, 63, 107, 112,
    118, 129, 133, 135, 153, 160, 167, 174, 197, 202, 209, 213, 230,
    236, 243, 246, 253, 261, 289, 294, 301, 304, 308, 311, 316, 323,
    344, 367, 378, 383, 386, 393, 404, 407, 410, 413――ii. 36, 51, 59,
    80, 86, 89, 90, 92, 106, 116, 118, 126, 130, 136, 141, 146, 151,
    157, 169, 226, 230, 232, 234, 240, 251, 253, 258, 273, 275, 282,
    291, 299, 309, 315, 319, 332, 340, 354――iii. 60, 64, 75, 78, 101,
    118, 124, 128, 139, 161, 168, 177, 182, 190, 195, 199, 208, 222,
    232, 237, 354, 391, 402, 419, 421, 425, 436, 441, 448, 462――iv. 1,
    7, 12, 19, 48, 50, 53, 61, 66, 71, 93, 97, 110, 116, 128, 131, 137,
    152, 155, 160, 164, 185
  ―――― post mortem, iv. 56
  Inscriptions made by Leland at St. Mawe’s castle, iv. 273
  Inspeximus, iv. 83
  Intrenchment at Trove, i. 143
  Intsworth, i. 36.――Manor, account of, iii. 251
  Inundations of sand, iii. 6
  Ipswich, ii. 76
  Ireland, I. 115, 295, 336, 373――iii. 277 _bis_, 290, 336, 342, 408,
    431, 433 _bis_, 434――iv. 173.――Kings of, i. 328.――St. Patrick, the
    Apostle of, ii. 65. Perkin Warbeck proclaimed Lord of 188. Cleared
    of serpents by St. Patrick 298. Sir Richard Grenville undertakes to
    people 342. Lord Robarts Lord Lieutenant of 379.――Apostle of, iii.
    364. Missionary saints of 7
  Irish channel, i. 60――iii. 254
  ―――― church, iii. 434
  ―――― court, ii. 188
  ―――― kings, ten maintained miraculously by St. Perran, iii. 313
  ―――― men, i. 295
  ―――― oak, St. Michael’s church built of, ii. 176
  ―――― saints, iii. 331
  ―――― sea, i. 230, 245, 289, 322, 382――ii. 48, 86, 145, 234, 257,
    282――iii. 11, 139, 175, 176, 237, 429――iv. 42, 52, 66, 164
  ―――― wars, iv. 75, 116
  Iron Acton, Gloucestershire, iv. 86
  Isaac, i. 325.――His Memorials of Exeter, ii. 189, 196――iv. 111
  Isabel, Princess, i. 130
  Isabella, Queen of Edward 2nd, ii. 142
  Isey, St. iii. 190
  Isidore, Cardinal, ii. 370
  Iske or Ex river, i. 342
  Isle of Wight, ii. 76
  Isleworth, poor of, iii. 153
  Issey or Issy, St. parish, i. 115, 212――iii. 334, 335
  ISSEY, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Mr. Tonkin’s
    character of Cornish attornies, the Warne suit, ii. 253. Guardian
    saint, St. Giggy’s Well, Halewyn, Cannall-Lidgye 254. Trevance,
    Trevorike 255. Carthew mine 256. By Editor, name of the church,
    impropriators, monuments, St. Ide manor, Blayble ibid. Statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 257
  Italian people, claim the appearance of St. Michael, ii. 172
  ―――― romances, ii. 214
  Italy, i. 206――ii. 244, 369, 371 _bis_, 372, 375――iii. 121, 171,
    186, 187, 401――iv. 101――Thomas Paleolagus retires to, ii. 367, 368.
    Removes from 370
  Ithal, King of Gwent, i. 10
  Iva, Dinas, i. 412
  ―――― St. iii. 342
  Ive or Ivo, St. i. 151. History of 412
  Ive’s, St. bay, ii. 150――iii. 5, 339.――Its sand composed almost
    entirely of powdered shells, ii. 262
  ―――― St. borough, ii. 128――iv. 58.――Charters, extent of franchise,
    arms, form of writ, ii. 258. Sir F. Basset’s cup, and inscription
    upon 259, 271. John Payne mayor of 198.――Members of Parliament for,
    Mr. Borlase, iii. 51, 84. James Halse 91. William Noye 143, 152. Mr.
    Praed 9, 10
  ―――― St. lordship, iii. 46, 123
  ―――― St. parish, i. 344――ii. 215, 224, 229, 237, 286――iii. 5 _bis_,
    7, 173, 371, 435――iv. 52, 53 _bis_. By Leland 267.――Its living, i. 354
  IVE’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, ancient
    name, value of benefice, ii. 257. Patron, incumbent, rector, land
    tax, former name of the town, Pendennis Island, road for ships,
    Ludduham manor, borough of St. Ive’s, its franchise, arms, form of
    writ 258. Chief inhabitants, first charter, Trenwith 259. By Tonkin,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, former state of
    the town 260. Old chapel, roadstead, fishing, chief inhabitants,
    custom house officers, Trenwith 261. By Editor, present importance
    of the borough, methods of fishing for pilchards ibid. Manner of
    preserving, and nature of the fish 263. Pier, Praed’s Act, mode of
    preserving fishing nets, nets introduced from Dungarvon 264.
    Singular custom, Rev. Mr. Toup 265. Mr. Knill 266. His monument 267.
    Transport from the West Indies driven into St. Ive’s 268. Stephens
    family 269. Effect of reform bill, salubrity of the town, plague of
    1647, escape of the Stephens family, fever of 1786, cup given by Sir
    Francis Basset, inscription upon it, arms of the town 271. Church,
    view of the town, parish feast, St. Eury, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 272
  ―――― St. town, i. 228, 403 _bis_, 412――iii. 6
  Ivonis, St. or St. John Baptist, i. 409

  Jack, Richard, family, ii. 279
  Jackman, Rev. William, ii. 31――Hugh, iii. 327
  ―――― of Treworock, i. 177
  Jackson, musical composer, iii. 220
  ―――― of Truro, Jane and John, i. 204
  Jacob, i. 241
  ―――― St. ii. 232
  Jacobstow parish, ii. 86――iii. 275, 352, _bis_, 353――iv. 59, 124,
    125, 131, 136
  JACOBSTOW parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Penfon, ii. 232. By
    Tonkin, patron saint, etymology ibid. By Editor, from Lysons,
    Southcott ibid. Penhallam, Berry Court, history of Mr. Degory Weare
    233. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 234
  Jago, John, family, i. 10.――John, ii. 136, 137. Rev. E. V. 376. Rev.
    William 136, 137. Family 5
  ―――― of Innis, Agnes and Jane, i. 399. John 397 _bis_, 398 _ter._,
    399 _bis_. Itai 397, 399 _bis_. Arms 397, 399. Etymology 397
  ―――― King, i. 397
  Jagoe, i. 416
  Jamaica, iii. 219 _bis_. Expedition to 86. Mr. Price settled there
    86. Sir Rose Price visited 87.――Sir William Trelawney, Governor of,
    iv. 37
  James, Henry, i. 277.――Thomas, ii. 160 _bis_――Pascoe, iii. 387. Dr.
    Thomas, his Bodleian Catalogue, and Introduction to Divinity 155
  ―――― of St. Columb, Anne and Mr. iii. 445
  ―――― of St. Keverne, W. iv. 33
  ―――― King, ii. 10. His reign and death 100
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 30, 56 _bis_, 65, 66, 93, 95, 155, 213, 269,
    277, 294, 382――iii. 75, 81, 83, 92, 104 _bis_, 132, 134, 142, 163
    _bis_, 183, 184, 212, 239, 281, 303, 314, 318, 337, 350, 449,
    463――iv. 2, 34, 67, 87, 88, 140, 161
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 22, 112, 227, 258――iii. 143, 201, 237, 238, 268, 297,
    298 _ter._――iv. 72, 85.――Distich upon, i. 105
  ―――― 4th, King of Scotland, ii. 186
  ―――― St. the Apostle, ii. 107, 338――iii. 161. His day 161, 309.
    Festival 439. Images of 309
  ―――― St. chapel of, iii. 309
  ―――― St. church at Compostella, ii. 107
  ―――― St. minor church, i. 299, 300
  ―――― St. hospital at Bridgewater, ii. 412
  ―――― St. hospital, Westminster, ii. 148, 149
  ―――― St. manor, Westminster, ii. 148. How obtained 145. Contradicted
    147. Exchanged for Conerton 140
  ―――― St. palace, Westminster, ii. 149
  ―――― St. priory, Bristol, i. 288――ii. 147, 148
  Jane, Nicholas, i. 215.――Thomas, ii. 16. Dr. William, Rev. Mr.
    Rector of Iron Acton, and Mr. schoolmaster, Truro 17.――Rev. Joseph
    of Truro, iv. 76. Mr. master of Truro school, was a native of
    Leskeard; Dr. William, Dean of Gloucester, his declaration 85
    Epigrams on, and Rev. J. son of the master 86
  J’Ans, Wrey, ii. 416
  Jansen, Cornelius, a picture by, iii. 156
  Janus, image of, iii. 144
  Jasminus revolutum, iv. 182
  Jeffery, Rev. George, of Linkinhorne, iii. 44
  Jeffries, Henry, i. 272. Family 274
  Jeffry, John, i. 10
  Jenkin, Peter, i. 216.――Henry and Perkin, iii. 387. Mr. 91. Family 83
  Jenkins, Grace, i. 363.――Rev. David, ii. 115. Mary 308. Mr. 124
  Jenkyn, James, i. 223
  ―――― of Trekyning, i. 223. Anne and James 262. Peter 223.――Family,
    iv. 139
  Jennings, i. 36
  Jerusalem, i. 307, 382, 411――ii. 414
  ―――― Knights of St. John of, ii. 180
  Jesuit confessor to Louis 14th, ii. 407
  ―――― missionaries, supposed to know Pope Gregory’s letter to St.
    Mellitus, ii. 290
  Jesuits, a college of, iv. 86
  Jesus chapel, St. Colomb Major, i. 214
  Jew, Cornish for, ii. 200
  ―――― family, iii. 270
  Jews, their cruelty and consequent persecution in England, i. 414
  Jews’ houses, ii. 215
  Jewyn, John, i. 83
  Job, Editor’s remarks upon the book of, iii. 69
  John or Ivan, i. 2
  ―――― William, i. 277.――George, ii. 124.――Rev. Ralph, iii. 326.
    Family 94
  ―――― of Gaunt, iii. 65
  ―――― of Rosemorron and Penzance, George, iv. 166
  John, King, ii. 118, 130, 158, 249, 310, 423, 426――iii. 169,
    433――iv. 71 _bis_, 144.――Founder of Beaulieu Abbey, with his
    reasons, ii. 327.――Made Truro a coinage town, iv. 73. Built the
    coinage hall there 72.――Prince, afterwards king, ii. 180. His
    treason, possessed of several castles, pursued, fled, deprived of
    bis estates, submitted, was pardoned 179
  John, King of France, ii. 39
  ―――― a monk of Glastonbury, iv. 27
  ―――― St. the Baptist, iii. 316.――St. Andrew and St. Peter his
    disciples, iv. 100. Pointed out Jesus to them 101
  ―――― St. the Evangelist, ii. 64――iv. 165.――His emblem, an eagle, ii.
    363.――His gospel, iii. 408
  ―――― St. cognizance of the order of, ii. 163.――Knights of, i.
    296――ii. 180――iii. 78, 80
  John’s, St. college, Oxford, ii. 407
  ―――― St. hospital, Bridgewater, ii. 412
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital at Jerusalem, iii. 441
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital in London, iii. 441
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital at Sithney, ii. 157――iii. 441 _bis_.
    Account of 441. Little known of, Leland’s account of, site pointed
    out by a stone 446
  ―――― St. parish, i. 32――iii. 101, 374
  JOHN’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, ii.
    250. Ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax.
    By Tonkin, manor of Intsworth 251. By Editor, Hals’s history of the
    Evangelists, real and legendary ibid. Tregenhawke manor by Lysons,
    patron, excavation in a cliff, church, statistics, rectors, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 252
  ―――― St. street, London, i. 411
  Johns, Henry, i. 273.――Stephen, ii. 55
  ―――― of Trewince, Stephen, ii. 57
  Johnson, Richard, i. 307.――Dr. iii. 49.――His correspondence with
    Macpherson, ii. 406.――Rev. W. M. of Perran Uthno, iii. 312. Mr. of
    St. Paul’s Churchyard 34
  Jolliffe, John, iv. 60
  Jone, i. 2
  Jones, Rev. Cadwallader, ii. 415. Edward, his Relics of the Welsh
    Bards 166.――Henry, iii. 429. Judge 144
  Jones of Wales, i. 416
  Jonson, Ben, ii. 22. His lines to Charles 1st, iii. 146
  Jope, Rev. J. i. 413――ii. 272
  Jordan of Dundagell, i. 331, 332
  Joseph, Michael, i. 86 _bis_.――iii. 388. Hanged, i. 87
  ―――― of Arimathea, St. iii. 262
  Jowle, i. 23
  Jubilee of 1809, ii. 241
  Julette, St. iv. 112
  Julian, St. iii. 55
  Juliana, i. 2
  Juliet, St. ii. 273. Account of 274
  Juliot, St. parish, ii. 86――iii. 232, 275
  Julius, St. Pope and Confessor, ii. 273, 274
  ―――― Cæsar, iii. 79――iv. 169
  Julyot, St. chapel, ii. 274 _bis_
  JULYOT, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, ii. 273. By Tonkin,
    patrons, saint 273. By Editor, saint from Whitaker ibid. Two St.
    Julyots, the present church formerly only a chapel, afterwards a
    parochial curacy, legend of the saint, her day, Rawle family,
    patrons of the benefice, statistics 274. Vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 275
  ―――― St. rectory, ii. 274
  Juncus, St. not in the Roman Calendar, iii. 292
  Junius, letters of, ii. 245
  Jupiter, i. 295.――Ammon, ii. 297
  ――――’s thunderbolt, ii. 132
  Just, St. Archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 279, 282. Account of 287
  ―――― St. Archbishop of Lyons, life of, ii. 279. His day 279, 280
  ―――― St. parish, i. 26――ii. 2, 50 _bis_, 265, 272――iii. 51, 242, 425
    _bis_, 428, 429――iv. 117.――Dr. Borlase, Vicar of, iii. 51
  JUST, ST. parish, near Penzance, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    saint, ancient state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    impropriator, land tax, etymology, Pendeyn, Bray, ii. 282. Chapel
    Carne Bray, view from, greatness of the Bray family 283. St. Ewny’s
    chapel, table of the seven kings 284. By Tonkin, Mayne Scriffer. By
    Editor, Pendeen ibid. Excavation near, Cove, Botallock, mines at
    285. Busvargus, impropriation of tithes, patron, incumbent, Rev. J.
    Smyth the curate 286. Parish feast, history of St. Just 287.
    Celebration of birthdays 288. Letter from Pope Gregory to St.
    Mellitus 289. Statistics, vicar, patron, name, Geology by Dr. Boase
    290. Botallock mine, parish affords most specimens of British
    minerals, and abounds in interesting objects 291
  Just in Roseland, ii. 228.――Curacy, iii. 67
  JUST, ST. in Roseland parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    ancient state, value of benefice, endowment, patron, ii. 275.
    Incumbent, land tax, borough of St. Mawe’s, courts leet, lords of
    the manor, two members, market, fair, arms, form of writ, castle,
    ii. 276. Emoluments of its officers, history of its governors 277.
    Lines on Capt. Rouse, emoluments of the officers at Pendennis castle
    278. By Tonkin, patron of living ibid. Treveres, Rosecossa,
    Tolcarne, by Editor, saint, comments on his history, his day 279.
    St. Mawe, his life, the castle, tradition of Henry VIII. Franchise
    conferred by Elizabeth, invariably a close borough till the Reform
    Bill 1832, 280. Corrack road, Leland’s inscription on the castle
    walls, advowson, incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 281
  Just, St. Pool, ii. 281
  Just, St. or Justinian by Leland, iv. 285
  Justicia adatota, iv. 182
  Justinian, Emperor, ii. 37
  Justus, St. Bishop of Rochester, iii. 284
  Jutsworth, i. 203
  Juvenal, iv. 87.――Sentiment of, iii. 273

  Kaine or Kayne, St. parish, iii. 13, 245
  Kainsham, ii. 292
  Kalerso, manor of, in Hilary and Sithney, iii. 359
  Kambton, now Camelford, ii. 402
  Kanane or Lelant, i. 2
  Karentocus, St. church, iv. 112
  Karn Boscawen, i. 141
  Karnbree castle, iv. 228
  Karnedon, ii. 427
  Katherine, Princess, daughter of Edward 4th, i. 64
  ―――― St. i. 157
  Kaye, Rev. Sir Richard, Dean of Lincoln, ii. 286
  Kea parish, iii. 222; or St Kea. Ferry to 212.――ii. 315, 357
  ―――― St. ii. 24. His history 306
  Keate, i. 405. Capt. Ralph 216. Etymology 224
  ―――― of Bosworgy, i. 224. Sir Jonathan, Capt. Ralph, and arms ibid.
  Kebius, St. honoured in his own country, ii. 338
  Keckewich or Keckewitch of Catchfrench, George, ii. 68 _bis_. John
    68. Arms, ib.――iii. 169
  ―――― of Essex, ii. 68――iii. 169
  Keckwitch of Tregleale, and arms, i. 372
  ―――― of Trehawke, i. 372. _See Kekewich_
  Keen, iii. 82. John 395
  ―――― of Roach, i. 234
  Keeper, Lord, ii. 52
  Kegwin family, iii. 216
  ――――of Newlyn, i. 148
  Keigwin, John, i. 109
  ―――― or Keigwyn of Mousehole, James, iii. 444. Jenken, killed by the
    Spaniards, the fatal ball preserved 287. John 86. John, his works
    288. Parthenia 86. Family 90, 288, 328. Estates sold 288
  Keir, Mr. ii. 219
  Kekewich, i. 131.――Mr. iii. 172. Mr. M. P. 19, 20.――Samuel, iv. 97
  ―――― of Hall, Mr. Peter, and arms, ii. 410
  ―――― of Trehawke, Peter, iii. 169. Miss 237
  Kelland Lands, ii. 294
  ―――― of Peynsford, Devon, ii. 385
  Kellaton parish, i. 153――iii. 161
  Kellaway of Egge, John, ii. 110 _bis_
  KELLINGTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, manor and borough, court
    leet, members to parliament, ii. 309. Arms, market, and fairs, form
    of writ, Hengiston Downs, battle at, tin in, Bray family 310.
    Creation of a knight banneret. By Tonkin, saint, etymology 311. By
    Editor, saint, life of St. Nicholas 312. Proprietors of the manor,
    legal mistake of the Earl of Orford 313. Statistics, and Geology by
    Dr. Boase 314
  Kellio, i. 54 _bis_. Richard 54
  Kelliow, in Cornelly, iii. 361
  ―――― John, ii. 398.――Richard, iii. 41
  ―――― of Landlake, Christopher, and his arms, ii. 399
  Kelly, i. 383
  ―――― of Trewint, Thomas, iii. 170
  Kellyfreth, ii. 304
  Kellygreen manor, iv. 97
  Kellyland, account of, ii. 230, 231
  Kellyow, i. 319. Arms 320
  ―――― of Rosillian, i. 53
  Kellysberye castle, iv. 229
  Kelsey, i. 292, 293
  Kemell of Kemell, Elizabeth, Pearce, Pierce, and arms, i. 265
  Kempe, i. 8, 20――ii. 54, 58. Anna Coryton and Admiral Arthur 58.
    Rev. John, vicar of Fowey 48. Nicholas 54. Sir William 58. Mr. 97.
    Arms 54.――Arthur, and Rev. Charles T. of St. Michael Carhayes, iii.
    207. Family 75.――Robert, iv. 77
  ―――― of Carclew, Samuel, ii. 57
  ―――― of Chelsea, Nicholas, ii. 58
  ―――― of Lavethan in Blissland, Humphrey, ii. 56. Richard 58
  ―――― of Newington, Surrey, John, ii. 58
  ―――― of Olantigh in Wye, Kent, family, ii. 58
  ―――― of Penryn, James, i. 17――James and James, iii. 76. Jane 229.
    John 76. Samuel 225 _bis_, 228. Built a house at Cartlew 225, 228.
    Miss 74
  ―――― of Roseland, Miss, ii. 307
  ―――― of Rosteage, or Rosteague, Nicholas, ii. 58――iii. 76
  ―――― of Tregony, Richard, iv. 118
  Kempethorne, family monuments, iii. 255. Name 256
  ―――― of Tonacombe, family, iii. 255
  Kempton, ii. 81
  Ken, Thomas, Bishop of Bath and Wells, iii. 296, 299
  Kendall, i. 211.――Rev. Nicholas, ii. 393. Archdeacon Nicholas 391.
    Rev. Mr. 59. Monuments 391.――Charles, M.D. iii. 41. His daughter 42.
    Family monuments 253.――Rev. Mr. of Talland, iv. 38. Family 38
  ―――― of Killigarth, Archdeacon, iii. 41, 437
  ―――― of Medroff, Miss, ii. 89
  ―――― of Middlesex, Colonel James and his son, Thomas, and
    Archdeacon, iv. 23. Family 23
  ―――― of Pelyn, i. 205 _bis_. Rev. Nicholas 352.――Walter, ii.
    391.――Jane and Walter, iii. 186
  ―――― of Treworgye, i. 244, 318 _bis_, 319. John and Richard 318.
    Arms 319
  Kendred, i. 200
  Kenegie, account of by Editor, ii. 123, 124. Etymology 124
  Kenn, deanery of in Devon, iii. 372
  Kenna, St. ii. 207――iii. 120. A monk 206. She imparted virtue to St.
    Michael’s chair 206. To her well near Liskeard, her history,
    converted vipers into ammonites 207
  ――――’s, St. well, ii. 207
  Kennal manor, iv. 3
  Kenneggy, account of, by Hals, ii. 121, 122
  Kenrick cove, ii. 117, 331 _bis_
  Kensham family, ii. 320
  Kent county, i. 259――ii. 38――iii. 10, 284.――Coast of, iv.
    169.――People brave, i. 88. Rebels enter 87.――Lands drowned in, iii.
    310. Weald of 10
  ―――― Earl of, i. 87.――Hugo de Burgh, ii. 428.――Godwyn, iii. 310.
    Hubert de Burgh 349. Thomas Holland 27
  ―――― Ethelbert, King of, ii. 284
  ―――― Nicholas, i. 12. Thomas 260.――John, killed by a thunderbolt,
    ii. 132
  Kentigern, St. i. 306
  Kenwen, Kenwin, or Kenwyn parish, iv. 70, 75, 79, 80, 92 _bis_
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 76 _bis_, 80. Has a church of its own 76
  Kenwin parish, iii. 313. Three barrows and four barrows in 322
  Kenwyn church, iii. 367――iv. 76, 77, 80
  ―――― parish, i. 177, 202――ii. 298, 299, 302
  KENWYN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, Edles, St. Clare’s well, ii. 315.
    Tregavethan 316. By Tonkin, Tregarvethan ibid. Three barrows,
    Roseworth 317. By Editor, includes old Truro, nature of soil,
    Calenick and Cavedras smelting houses ibid. Manor of Newham,
    Bosvigo, Comprigney, church conspicuous and commanding a fine view,
    bells, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 318
  Kenyon, i. 391
  Keppell, Admiral, court martial upon, ii. 246. Bishop of Exeter 224
  Kerantakers, St. i. 249
  Kerhender, i. 2
  Keri, i. 2
  Kerrier hundred, i. 32, 118, 135, 236, 301――ii. 358――iii. 59, 74
    _bis_, 75 _bis_, 110, 111, 124, 224, 228, 257, 416, 419, 421, 441,
    442 _quat._――iv. 1, 2, 5, 377. _See Kerryer_
  ―――― and Helston hundred, i. 38
  Kerrocus, St. iv. 112
  Kerryer hundred, ii. 1, 80 _bis_, 92, 116 _bis_, 126, 129 _bis_, 136
    _bis_, 155 _bis_, 319. Etymology of 320
  ―――― manor and stannaries, ii. 155
  Kerthen, i. 266 _bis_
  Kestell, i. 370――iii. 110, 113.――Account of, i. 375――iii. 111
  ―――― John, iii. 112. Miss 76. Mr. and two daughters 112. Family 111,
    113. Arms 112, 113.――Edward, iv. 77
  ―――― of Kestell, i. 370. James and John 371, 375. Arms 371, 374.
    Crest 375
  ―――― of Manacow, i. 371
  ―――― of Pendavy, i. 371 _bis_. Thomas 375
  ―――― of Wollas, i. 419
  ―――― of Wartha, i. 419
  ―――― river, i. 371
  Kestvaen found near Pelynt, iv. 32
  Keverines, St. by Leland, iv. 270
  Keverne, St. visits St. Perran, ii. 324
  ―――― church, its lofty situation, spire destroyed by lightning, ii. 325
  ―――― parish, ii. 250――iii. 332, 419
  KEVERNE, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, remarkable
    places, Treleage, ii. 319. Treland, Condura, and Tregarne manors,
    Lanarth, singular shipwreck 320. Treatment of the wrecked by the
    French 323. Arrival of a boat from Ireland 324. By Editor, St.
    Keverne, numerous coves, Coverack, Porthonstock, Porthalla, shoal
    of pilchards 324. Situation of church, spire destroyed by
    lightning during divine service, monuments, sarcophagus to the
    memory of Major Cavendish and his companions 325. Supposed cause
    of their wreck, tithes, Kilter 326. Lanarth, former impropriation,
    property of Beaulieu abbey at its dissolution, King John’s charter
    to it 327. With translation 328. Afforded sanctuary to Queen
    Margaret, and to Perkin Warbeck, incumbent of this parish 329.
    Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, geological interest of the
    Lizard, fragmentary rock near Bostowda 330. Cliffs bold, beautiful
    heath in the serpentine formation 331
  Keveryn, St. by Leland, iv. 288
  Kevorall, iii. 119
  Kevorne, St. i. 39――iii. 124
  ―――― parish, iii. 128 _bis_, 416, 421
  Kew, St. his history by Tonkin, ii. 337
  ―――― church, i. 74
  ―――― or Kewe, St. parish, i. 168, 173, 382――iii. 64, 74, 240――iv.
    42, 44, 93, 94, 95 _ter._
  KEW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax,
    chief places, Lanew, ii. 332. Lawsuit for 333. Bokelly, Trearike
    335. Dower bank, Tregeare, Penpons, Chappell Amble, Middle Amble
    336. By Tonkin, patron saint, impropriator 337. Incumbent, ancient
    name 338. By Editor, St. Kew or Kebius, parish fertile, situation of
    church, Skinden, Trewane ibid. Pedigree of Nicholls, impropriation
    of tithes, advowson, monuments in church, Editor the descendant of
    Attorney-General Noye, statistics, incumbent 339. Geology by Dr.
    Boase 340
  Key cross, ii. 300
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 305
  ―――― or Keye parish, i. 76, 241――ii. 129
  KEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ii. 298.
    Ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbents, land tax, chief
    places, Nansavallan 299. Guddarne, strange story of Mr. Bauden,
    Kelleho, Trelogas 300. Burrow belles, and three other burrows,
    opened, and stone tomb found within, Curlyghon 301. By Tonkin,
    etymology, church a daughter to Kenwyn, patron, incumbents, manor of
    Blanchland, mines upon, lawsuit about 302. Guddern, Nansavallan,
    Kelliou 303. Trevoster, Kellyfreth, Chasewater 304. Manor of Key
    305. By Editor, saint, his boat, Nansavallon ibid. Farm improved,
    Killiow, removal of church 306. Mr. Reginald Haweis, curious
    coincidence 307. Trelease, Carlian the birth-place of Sir Tristrem,
    Chasewater, its chapel, statistics 308. Vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    Baldue mine 309
  Keyewis, ii. 315
  Keyn, or Keyne, St. i. 316. British, daughter of Braghan King of
    Wales, account of by Hals, ii. 292. By Tonkin 293. Keyne, Saxon,
    account of by Hals 292. By Tonkin 293. Both may be the same 294
  KEYNE, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, incumbent, ii. 291. Land tax, saint, her history,
    another St. Keyne, Copleston family 292. By Tonkin, the two saints
    293. By Editor, ancient name from Lysons, proprietors of the manor,
    St. Keyne’s well, lines on, from Carew 294. Remarks by Tonkin,
    Bond’s account of 295. Southey’s lines upon 296. The petrified
    serpents are Cornua Ammonis 297. St. Hilda and St. Patrick’s
    miracles, the snakes had no heads, St. Brechan, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 298
  Keyne’s, St. well, account of by Carew, and verses on, ii. 294. By
    Tonkin and Bond 295. Southey’s verses on 296
  Keynesham, ii. 293. Cornua Ammonis abundant in 297
  Keynock castle, iv. 228
  Khalcondylas’s account of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 368
  Kiaran, or Kenerin, St., (Perran) iii. 331
  Kidlacton, ii. 427 _bis_
  Kieran, Bishop, ii. 319
  ―――― St. rectory, ii. 319
  Kigan, iv. 76
  Kilcoid lands, ii. 394
  Kildare, Earls of, i. 34. Charles, Earl of 297
  Kilgal family, iv. 36
  Kilgather, ii. 394
  ―――― parish, ii. 398
  Kilkhampton manor, possessed by the Grenvilles nearly from the
    Conquest, ii. 343
  ―――― parish, ii. 413――iii. 118, 254, 256, 349, 351――iv. 15, 19
  KILKHAMPTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Stowe, ii. 340. Grenville
    family, erection of Bideford bridge, loss of the Mary Rose frigate
    341. The Grenvills 342. Battle of Lansdowne, Orcott. By Editor,
    account of the Grenville family 343. Gallant encounter of Sir
    Richard Grenville with the Spaniards of Terceira 344. Mansion at
    Stowe, Ilcombe 346. Alderscombe, Elmsworthy, monuments in the
    church, description of one to Sir Beville Grenville 347. Patron of
    the living, character of Sir Beville 348. His letter to Sir John
    Trelawney 349. Family continued 350. Dispersion of the materials of
    Stowe, Alderscombe 351. Hervey’s Meditations composed here,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 352. Extracts from
    the register 348
  Killaloe, diocese of, iii. 434
  Killas hills, iii. 11
  Killaton parish, ii. 229
  Killcoid, i. 264
  Killiganoon, etymology and history of, ii. 34
  Killigarth, i. 262 _bis_, 264.――Miss, ii. 398
  Killignock, or Checkenock, iv. 139
  ―――― Thomas and his daughter, family, iv. 139
  Killigrew barton, i. 399 _quat._, 403, 411. Account of 398
  ―――― i. 136. John 93. Sir John 136. Sir Peter 137 _bis_. Sir William
    65. Monuments 136――ii. 5, 372, 376. Family descended from Richard
    King of the Romans 8. Lords of Pendennis castle 17. Slighted by Hals
    21. Represented by Lord Wodehouse 23. Founded the hospital of St.
    John at Helston 163. Ann 22. George 5 _bis_. Killed 5. Henry 5, 22.
    Sir Henry 7 _bis_, 15, 372, 373 _bis_, 376. Obtained from the Bishop
    of Exeter, the manor of Kirton, now gone from the name 7. His
    marriage 15. Appointed ambassador to Henry 4th of France, his wife’s
    Latin letter to her sister Lady Cecil 16. His daughter married to
    Sir Jonathan Trelawney 16. Ambassador to Venice or Genoa 372. Jane,
    widow of Sir John, murders two Spanish merchants, tried and
    convicted, pardoned, but her accomplices sentenced to death 6. Gave
    a silver cup to the mayor of Penryn 7, 97. Her story cannot be true
    21. John 5. Built the town of Falmouth 8. Opposed by the
    neighbouring boroughs 9. Proceeded with the King’s approbation 10.
    Sir John 5, 7. Jane his widow 6. Fired his own house 17. Maugan 5.
    Peter 5. Sir Peter 5 _ter._, 6, 147. Built a church at Falmouth 3.
    Annexed the advowson to his manor of Arwinick, buried in the
    chancel, gave a house and garden to the rector, and a pulpit cloth
    to the church 4. Procured a charter of incorporation for the borough
    8. Thomas, jester to Charles 2nd 14. His reply to Lewis 14th,
    Reproof of Charles’ extravagance turned against William 3rd, and his
    court 15. Degraded by common report, his history from the
    Biographical Dictionary 21. Son of Sir Robert 21. An author, buried
    in Westminster Abbey, the reverse of Cowley, epigram upon both 22.
    William 23. Sir William, Bart., wasted his estate 5. Lady 373. Mr.
    20. Arms 7.――Sir Henry and his daughter, iii. 169. M. L. and Sir
    Peter 228. Sir William 75. Mr. founder of St. John’s Hospital,
    Sithney, family 75 _bis_
  Killigrew, of Arwinick, Jane Lady, ii. 97.――George, iii. 417. Sir
    Peter 417 _bis_. Miss 147
  ―――― of Killigrew, i. 398. Sir John 398, 399
  Killington church, ii. 230
  ―――― parish, iv. 6, 7
  Killingworth, iv. 24
  Killiton borough, court leet, members of parliament, and mode of
    election, ii. 309. Election of mayor, arms, market and fairs, form
    of writ. Sir Edward Bray lived at 310
  Killrington, Alice and Walter, i. 262
  Killter of Kevorne killed a royal commissioner, ii. 192
  Killygarth, ii. 181.――Barton, iv. 21, 22 _bis_, 23, 38
  ―――― manor, iv. 21, 22 _bis_, 23, 36, 38
  Killygrew, Sir Peter, Bart., iv. 72. Mr. 22
  Killyow, account of, by Hals, ii. 300. By Tonkin 303. By Editor 305
  ―――― of Killyow, ii. 303
  ―――― of Lanleke, ii. 303
  ―――― of Rosiline, ii. 303
  Killyquite. _See Colquite_
  Kilmarth, iv. 109
  Kilmenawth or Kilmenorth, iv. 36
  Kilminarth, celt found at, iv. 33
  ―――― woods, iv. 29
  Kilter, account of, ii. 326
  ―――― Mr. concerned in Arundell’s rebellion, ii. 326
  Kilwarby, Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, i. 83
  Kilwarth hill, description of, i. 189. Ascent to the highest points
    190, 191. Etymology 193
  Kilworthy near Tavistock, ii. 230
  Kinance cove, iii. 259, 260. Its beauty 259
  King, the, iii. 223
  ―――― or Kings of England, i. 139.――ii. 59, 272. Annals of 60
  ―――― Charles 2nd, at Boconnoc, i. 113, 114 _ter._ His speech to Sir
    F. Basset 114
  ―――― George packet, iii. 229
  King, i. 270, 413. Elizabeth 222. Oliver and arms 204.――Degory, ii.
    253, 254. Edward, his Munimenta Antiqua, and hypotheses of the
    extreme antiquity of Lanceston Castle 423 _bis_, 424. Philip 423.
    Mr. 377. Family 217.――Lord Chanceller, iii. 51
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 204. Henry ibid.
  King’s army, iv. 186
  ―――― books, i. 320――ii. 123, 146, 356, 391, 394 _bis_, 398, 413,
    417――iii. 14, 22, 24, 37, 40, 44, 46, 56, 116, 126, 182, 188, 224,
    255, 257, 260, 267, 276, 284, 291, 306, 313, 334, 339, 345, 347,
    349, 352, 372, 374, 380, 396, 405, 419, 423, 426, 431, 437, 443, 450
    _bis_, 457 _bis_――iv. 7, 15, 23, 40, 44, 62, 66, 75, 95, 102, 112,
    117, 118, 129, 140, 153, 157, 162
  King’s College, Cambridge, i. 146――ii. 153, 209, 244
  ―――― road, ii. 1. In Falmouth harbour 275, 281
  Kingdon, Rev. T. H. i. 135.――Robert, ii. 416.――G. B. iii. 351. Rev.
    John of Marham church 117 _bis_.――G. B. character of, iv. 16. Rev.
    John of Whitstone 154
  Kingfisher ship, iii. 187
  Kingills, King of the West Saxons, ii. 284
  Kingston, iii. 108
  ―――― Sir Anthony, i. 88.――Provost marshal, ii. 197. Taxed with
    extreme cruelty 198
  Kirkham, i. 260. Mrs. Damaris 376
  Kirton, Bishop of, i. 116――iii. 1.――Levignus, ii. 60. Lurginus 62
  ―――― bishopric, i. 231――ii. 61 _bis_, 299
  ―――― see of, iii. 456
  ―――― manor alienated from the see of Exeter, ii. 7
  Kist Vaen, iii. 319
  Kit or Kitt hill, i. 122, 159――ii. 314
  Kitson, Rev. Walter, i. 409
  Kivell, Ann, iii. 77.――Thomas, ii. 241
  Knava, Ralph, i. 121. Etymology 122
  ―――― of Godolphin, John, i. 122
  Kneighton’s Kieve, i. 343
  Knicker, i. 317
  Knight, John, iii. 319, 327
  ―――― of Gasfield Hall, Essex, iii. 192
  Knights banneret, mode of creation of, ii. 311
  ―――― hospitallers, iv. 48, 50.――Account of, i. 410
  ―――― of the Round Table, i. 339 _bis_. Instituted 336
  ―――― Templars, iii. 83. Of Jerusalem, iv. 48 _bis_, 49
  Knighton, St. iv. 155
  Knill, John, eccentric, ii. 128. His life and mission to the West
    Indies 266. Privateering, humane, built a pyramid for his own
    burial, but was buried at St. Andrew’s, Holborn 267. His
    character 268
  Kniverton of Treadreath in Lelant, iv. 4
  Kniveton, Thomas, iii. 6
  Knollys, Sir Robert, a valiant commander under the Black Prince, ii. 176
  Kradock ap Ynir, King, iv. 44
  Kurie, St. Eleeeson, i. 315
  Kusterus’ Suidas, ii. 266
  Kynans cove, beauty of its rocks and caverns, and its rare plants,
    ii. 360
  Kynock castle, i. 77, 88, 94
  Kyvere Ankou, i. 9

  Laa, i. 44. Anecdote of Mr. and Mrs. ib.
  Lacy, Walter de, iii. 405
  Ladoca, St. history of, ii. 353
  Ladock manor, ii. 354
  ―――― parish, i. 386――iii. 354, 450.――Rector of, Mr. Pooley, ii. 34
  LADOCK parish, or Lassick, Hals’s manuscript lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, ii. 352. Boundaries, name, value of benefice, patrons,
    incumbent, manor of Nanreath, Hay, Boswaydel, Bedoke or Bessake 353.
    By Editor, value of benefice, village of Bedock, Pitt property,
    Trethurfe, Nansaugh, Hay, manor of Bessake, Rev. John Eliot 354.
    Beautiful vale, church, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 355. Stream
    tin and gold 356
  ―――― valley, iii. 189
  Lady chapel, ii. 201
  Lahe, i. 144
  ―――― Rev. John, Rector of Lanivet, character and memoir of, ii. 388.
    William lost at sea, his brother died of consumption 389.――John
    Bishop of Chichester, iii. 295. One of the seven 299
  Lalant or Kananc, i. 2
  Lamana chapel, iii. 245
  La Mayne, free chapel of, iv. 26
  Lamb, two brothers made a great fortune, ii. 47
  Lambert, William, Prior of St. Michael’s Mount, the last Prior, ii.
    209.――Elizabeth, iii. 86
  Lambessa, in St. Clement’s, family seat of the Footes, iv. 90
  Lambesso, i. 207. Account of 203
  Lambeth palace, iii. 71, 73. Archbishop’s chapel at 296
  Lambourn manor, i. 10――iii. 318 _bis_, 325. Account of 316, 319
  Lambourne town, iii. 318 _bis_, 319, 321, 324
  Lambrigan, iii. 314, 319, 324. Or Lambourne Wigan, account of 314
    Lower town of 315
  Lambron of Lambourn, Amara, iii. 317. John 316 _bis_. Sir John and
    Sir John 316. Sir John 320. William 316. Family 316, 317 _bis_. Arms 316
  Lamburn, Sir William, i. 213.――Family, ii. 80
  Lamburne, heir of, iii. 140
  ―――― of Lamburne, i. 120
  ―――― parish in Peran, iii. 317
  Lamelin of Lamelin family, Margery, Thomas, arms, ii. 411
  Lamellin manor, ii. 411――iii. 20.――Account of, ii. 411
  Lamellyn, ii. 89――iii. 169
  Lametton, ancient name of St. Keyne parish, ii. 294
  ―――― manor, ii. 294
  Lammana, a cell for Benedictine Monks at, its chapel remains,
    described, iv. 25
  ―――― island, iv. 26
  Lamoran manor, ii. 356. Account of 357
  ―――― or Lammoran parish, iii. 180, 207, 222. Or Lamorran, i. 242
  LAMORAN parish, Hals’s Manuscript by Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, saint, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, manor of
    Lamoran, ii. 356. By Editor, value ibid. Two villages, Tregenna,
    Lamoran manor, advowson, situation of church, monuments, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, rector, patron 357
  ―――― village, ii. 357
  Lamorrick village, ii. 385
  Lampeer, i. 204
  ―――― of Truro, his unfortunate end, ii. 30
  Lampen, i. 205.――Rev. Robert, iii. 370
  Lamplugh, Archbishop of York, iii. 296, 297
  Lalant, by Leland, iv. 285
  Lanante, by Leland, iv. 267
  Lanarth, account of, by Hals, ii. 320. By Editor 327
  Lanbaddern, heir of, iii. 140
  Lancar, i. 83
  Lancashire, ii. 112
  Lancaster castle, ii. 179, 257
  ―――― John, Duke of, ii. 259
  ―――― Earl of, Thomas, ii. 363.――Edmund, iii. 19
  ―――― house of, ii. 108, 185, 186
  Lance, i. 394, 395. Richard 205
  ―――― of Penare, i. 204
  Lancells barton, ii. 415
  ―――― house, ii. 416
  ―――― manor, ii. 414
  ―――― parish, or Launcells, iii. 111, 118
  LANCELLS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, patron, value, ii. 413. Incumbent, earlier value,
    appropriation, Lancells manor 414. By Editor, cell of Austin canons,
    Hartland abbey, descent of property in the parish by Lysons 415.
    Manor of Norton Rolle, of Yellow Leigh, of Thorlibeer, of
    Mitchell-Morton, Tre Yeo, situation of the church, Chamond monument,
    Lancell’s house, destroyed, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 416
  ―――― Prior of, ii. 49
  Lanceston, or Launceston, ii. 87, 98, 377, 378, 430 _bis_. The
    Royalists march into Somersetshire from 343.――Charles 1st. advanced
    to, iv. 185
  ―――― assizes, ii. 333. Trials at 52, 331, 336
  ―――― castle, description of, ii. 421, 423――iv. 229.――Its extreme
    antiquity, ii. 423
  ―――― Court of Common Pleas at, ii. 53
  ―――― domui, i. 112
  ―――― mayor of, his feudal service, ii. 229
  ―――― parish church, ii. 420
  ―――― priory, ii. 377. Account of 425. Its church and monuments, its
    destruction 425. Loss of archives and charters 426. Revenues 428,
    429. Horton and Stephan, priors of 419
  Lancherit, iii. 139
  Lancorla, iv. 138 _bis_
  Landaff, Bishops of, St. Theliaus, i. 321. St. Dubritius and their
    Constat 382
  ―――― cathedral, built by St. German, ii. 65
  ―――― church of, ii. 172
  Landawidnick, ii. 116
  Landegey or Landegge parish, the same as Key, ii. 299, 305, 315
  Landedy and Lanner in St. Key, iii. 359
  Lander, the two African travellers, are from Truro, their discovery
    of the course of the Niger, monument erecting to, iv. 90
  Landeveneck monastery, ii. 129 _bis_
  Landew, ii. 418――iii. 41. Account of 40. Monuments of the possessors 43
  ―――― family, iii. 42
  Landewednack parish, iv. 53
  LANDEWEDNACK parish, Hals’s MS. lost, ii. 357. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, saint, value, patron, manor of Lizard. By Editor,
    Church town and Lizard town, villages, manor of Tretheves, Mr.
    Fonnereau, lighthouses 358. Statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase. Cliffs interesting 359. Perranbonse and Hensall coves,
    geology by Editor, soap rock, native copper, Kynan’s cove, beautiful
    assemblage of rocks, natural caverns, rare plants 360. Instances of
    longevity by Dr. Borlase, spar manufactory 361
  Landigey or Landithy, iii. 83, 90. Account of 80
  Landisfarne, i. 289, 290
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 290
  ―――― bishoprick, transferred to Durham, i. 290
  Landowednack Lizard, i. 348
  ―――― parish, iii. 128, 259, 424
  Landrak, ii. 59
  Landrake parish, i. 103――ii. 277.――Or Lanrake, iii. 345, 347, 461
  LANDRAKE parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, patron, manor of Lanrake, ii. 361. By Editor,
    manor, churchtown, church, monuments in, Wotton cross, Tidiford,
    small river, tradition of Tidiford, Plymouth limestone burnt, its
    value in agriculture, Wotton 362. St. Erney 363. By Editor,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 364
  Land’s End, i. 132, 138, 228, 359――ii. 149, 182, 225 bis 237, 247,
    283, 284, 408――iii. 6, 11, 99, 120, 265, 309, 310, 428, 430,
    445――iv. 165, 166, 168, 173, 174. Road to, i. 20.――Anciently
    called Bolerium, ii. 20. Road from London to 317.――Description of,
    iii. 429. District 427. Various names of 431. Granite rocks at,
    scene, latitude and longitude, sun at 432. Its inscriptions 433.
    _See Dartmoor_
  Land tax, iii. 75, 110, 119, 128, 139, 161, 168, 177, 182, 190, 195,
    199, 208, 222, 237, 271, 391, 403, 419, 421, 425, 428, 436, 441,
    448, 456, 462――iv. 1, 7, 13, 19, 20, 39, 43, 53, 59, 63, 66, 68, 71,
    93, 99, 111, 128, 131, 137, 152, 155, 160, 164, 185.――Act for
    redeeming, i. 403. Fixed for Cornwall 1
  Landulph parish, i. 103, 310――iii. 345.――Rev. F. V. J. Arundell,
    rector of, ii. 387
  LANDULPH parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    ii. 364. Etymology, value, patron 365. By Editor, situation of
    church, monuments, one to Theodore Paleolagus, history of him by Mr.
    Arundell ibid. His dynasty 366. Causes of his removal from Italy
    370. His marriage, issue, and residence at Clifton in this parish
    372. Death 373. Chasm in the register, discrepancy in the dates of
    Theodore’s death, account of his children 374. Manors of Landulph
    and Glebridge, Clifton 375. Lower family, life of Dr. Bradley,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 376
  Landuwednac, name explained, iv. 314
  Landy, St. ii. 358
  Lane, Rev. Mr. and his wife, died of a violent fever raging at St.
    Ives, ii. 271
  ―――― village, i. 20
  Laneast parish, i. 197――iii. 461――iv. 63 _bis_, 69, 70
  LANEAST parish, MS. of Hals lost, ii. 376. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, impropriation 377. By Editor, villages, Tregeare,
    impropriation, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase, Letcot mine of
    manganese 378
  ―――― village, ii. 377
  Laner castle, iv. 228
  Lanescot and Fowey Consols, iv. 110
  Laneseley church, ii. 118
  ―――― manor, ii. 118, 119 _ter._, 176. Account of 120, 121
  Lanest, ii. 430 _bis_
  Lanew barton, account of, ii. 332. Lawsuit for 333. Sold 334
  Lanewa, account of, i. 418
  Lanfrank, Archbishop of Canterbury, i. 110
  Langden, Walter, iii. 358
  Langdon of Keverill, Walter, iii. 123
  Langford, Humphrey, and daughters, iii. 116. Family 116
  ―――― of Swadle Downes, Devon, Walter, iii. 116
  ―――― of Tremabe, Samuel, i. 177
  ―――― hill, iii. 116
  Langhairne, De, family, ii. 316 _bis_. Arms 316. Lost their property
    in the civil wars 317
  Langherne of Trevillon, i. 400. Thomas ibid.
  Langland, John, Bishop of Lincoln, i. 233
  Langley, Mr. of York, ii. 286
  Languit, etymology of, ii. 332
  Lanhadern, account of, i. 415
  ―――― of Lanhadern, i. 415 _quat._ Serlo de, and Serlo Lord 415
  Lanhearne, Alice, John de, iii. 149
  Lanhedrar, account of, i. 419
  ―――― of Lanhedrar, Serlo de, Baron, i. 419
  ―――― Lower, account of, i. 419
  Lanhengye chapel, i. 218
  Lanher, etymology of, and bishop’s palace at, i. 15
  Lanherne, i. 213.――Manor, ii. 145.――Account of, iii. 139,
    149.――Butler or Pincerna, Lord of, ii. 145
  ―――― Roman catholic establishment at, a refuge for nuns, iii. 150.
    Descended lineally from before the Conquest 151. Church near it
    ibid.
  Lanhidroc, i. 113
  Lanhidrock church, iii. 177.――Or Lanhydrock, i. 74
  ―――― house, account of, Editor remembers it, ii. 382. Housekeeping
    at 383
  ―――― manor, ii. 383
  ―――― parish, ii. 384, 390. Or Lanhydrock 187――iv. 74, 161, 187.
    Essex quartered at 185
  LANHIDROCK parish, MS. of Hals lost, by Tonkin, situation, ii. 378.
    Boundaries, saint, manor, residence  built by Lord Robarts, Earl
    of Radnor 379. His pedigree, Trefry 380. By Editor, Robarts family
    381. Lanhidrock house, impropriation of benefice 382. Hospitality
    of Lord Radnor, possessors of the manor, statistics 383. Geology
    by Dr. Boase 384
  Lanhudnow, i. 349
  Lanick, i. 199
  Lanisley or Lanistley, ii. 121. Etymology 123
  Lanivet church tower has no pinnacles, ii. 386
  ―――― hill, ii. 390
  ―――― parish, ii. 379, 390――iii. 55, 395
  LANIVET parish, Hals’s manuscript lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, patrons, incumbent, Tremere estate,
    ii. 384. By Editor, several villages 385. Church, monuments, patron
    and rector, St. Bennet’s convent 386. Landed property of the parish,
    select vestries, Rev. John Lake, rector 388. His family, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 389. Lanivet hill 390
  ―――― village, ii. 385
  Lank Major, i. 131
  ―――― Minor, i. 131
  Lankinhorn, ii. 428
  Lankinhorne, vicar of, iii. 457
  Lankynhorne, ii. 430
  Lanlaran (now St. Lawrance), i. 77
  Lanleke, in South Pederwyn, ii. 398, 418
  Lanlivery parish, ii. 41, 88, 379, 384――iii. 24, 26, 29, 55, 56――iv.
    99, 110
  LANLIVERY parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    ii. 390. St. Vorch, value of benefice, patron, incumbent. By Editor,
    conspicuous monuments in church, Pelyn house, summer house, St. Chad
    391. Portrait and inscription, Restormel castle, Richard King of the
    Romans kept his court there, titles, palace at Lestwithiel 392.
    Restormel house, statistics, vicar, and Geology by Dr. Boase 393
  Lanmigall, ii. 169, 175
  Lanmigell, i. 118, 261――ii. 80
  Lannan, i. 292
  Lannant parish, iii. 5
  ―――― or Lelant town, by Leland, iv. 267
  Lannar, Miss, iii. 125
  Lannyvet parish, iv. 160
  Lanowe, the ancient name of St. Kew parish, ii. 338. Etymology 332
  Lanrake manor, account of, ii. 361, 362
  Lanreath manor, account of, ii. 395. Sold 396
  ―――― parish, iii. 291, 302, 347――iv. 29, 110, 111, 115, 155.――Or
    Lanethon, ii. 398
  LANREATH parish, otherwise Lanraithow, Lanrayton, Lanrethan, or
    Lanrethon, Hals’s MS. lost, ii. 393. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, rectory, value, patron, incumbent, court, Sergeaux
    family 394. By Editor, Lanreath manor, court 395. Church, Grylls
    family 396. Botelett manor, Treyer manor, Trewen, Treean,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 397
  Lanredock, ii. 379
  Lanreth, i. 316
  ―――― manor, iv. 22, 110
  ―――― parish, ii. 291
  Lansagey, ii. 299
  Lansallas manor, ii. 399, 400
  ―――― parish, ii. 409, 412――iii. 291――iv. 19, 36 _bis_, 38
  LANSALLAS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value in King’s books, patron, incumbent, residents, ii. 398. Manor
    399. By Editor, church, latitude and longitude, manor ibid. Raphel
    manor, Tregavithick, Polvethan, Polperro, its trade and situation,
    statistics, rector 400. Geology by Dr. Boase, copper mine, blue
    slate, Polperro harbour 401
  Lansalwys, ii. 394
  Lansan manor, iii. 456
  Lansdowne, i. 113
  ―――― battle of, ii. 343, 345, 347, 350――iii. 40, 199――iv. 162, 172
  ―――― collection, ii. 426
  ―――― Lord, ii. 98. George Granville Lord, erected a monument to his
    grandfather, Sir Beville Grenville 348
  Lansen, iv. 50
  Lan Stephen, the ancient name of Lanceston, ii. 417
  Lanstoun, by Leland, iv. 256
  Lansulhas, iv. 22
  Lantallan, i. 77
  Lanteagles by Fowey, ii. 36
  Lantegles or Lanteglos, by Camelford parish, i. 1, 3, 304, 322――ii.
    48, 274――iii. 81, 222 _bis_, 291――iv. 20, 42, 44.――Rev. Wm.
    Phillipps, rector, ii. 399
  Lanteglise juxta Fawey, by Leland, iv. 279
  LANTEGLOS JUXTA CAMELFORD parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, value of rectory, patron, incumbent, in manor
    of Helstone in Trigg, ii. 401, and deanery of Trigg minor, the
    manor, a castle and two parks at Helstone, Camelford town,
    etymology, Arthur slain there, relics dug up, tradition of the
    battle 402. A later battle, Roman coins found, Carew’s etymology,
    insignificance of the borough, had a charter from Richard Earl of
    Cornwall, market and fairs 403. Constitution, revenues and seal of
    the borough, only one street, formerly a chapel 404. By Editor,
    extent of manor ibid. Vestiges of a camp, villages in the parish,
    Fentonwoon, Wallis the circumnavigator, Lord Darlington proprietor
    of the borough, it was close till extinguished in 1832, Lord
    Camelford, Mr. Macpherson 405. His correspondence with Dr. Johnson,
    Mr. Phillipps rector, his monument, Dr. Lombard his predecessor 406.
    Memoir and anecdotes of him 407. Statistics, present rector, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 408
  Lanteglos juxta Fowey parish, ii. 41, 398――iv. 38, 110, 111, 115, 188
  LANTEGLOS JUXTA FOWEY parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of living, patron, incumbent, manor of Hall,
    Fitz-William family, ii. 409. Description of the seat, Bodenick 410.
    Lamellin manor. By Editor, situation of church, monuments, value,
    tradition of Charles 1st being fired at, Polruan 411. Once a
    corporate town, appropriation of benefice 412. Statistics, and
    Geology by Dr. Boase 413
  Lantenny, i. 40
  Lantiant, by Leland, iv. 277
  Lantine, i. 415――ii. 89
  Lantreghey, iv. 25
  Lan Uthno, in St. Erth, iii. 311
  Lanvorch, ii. 391
  Lanwhitton or Lawhitton manor, iii. 2, 42
  ―――― parish, ii. 95――iii. 40, 43, 335, 338, 456
  LANWHITTON, parish of, Hals deficient. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, origin of the name, value of benefice, patron, manor,
    iii. 1. Farming of, remarkable places, Hexworthy 2. Bullsworthy 3.
    By Editor, church, monuments 3. Lease of the manor, Rev. Mr. Walker,
    statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 4
  Lanwordaby, Thomas, ii. 189
  Lanyhorn castle, iv. 228
  Lanyhorne by Leland, iv. 273
  ―――― creek, iii. 404
  ―――― or Lanihorne manor, iii. 406
  Lanyon, account of, ii. 142
  ―――― cromlech, stone replaced, iii. 32
  ―――― i. 125, 405.――John, ii. 32 _bis_. Built Trelisick house 32.
    Miss 259.――John, iii. 242. John 242, 243 _bis_. John 242 _bis_.
    Richard and William 242. The golden Lanyon 243. Family 242,
    427.――Miss, iv. 101
  ―――― of Lanyon, ii. 142, 143 _ter._ Tobias and arms 142
  ―――― of Madern, ii. 143
  ―――― of Normandy, and arms, ii. 143
  ―――― manor, possessors of, ii. 89
  Laran bridge, ii. 41.――Etymology, iv. 157
  Larmer family, iii. 47
  Larnake, iii. 371
  Larnick, Little, iv. 29. Curiosities found near 33
  Laroche, James, i. 101.――Sir James of Bristol, iii. 193
  Lateran, church of St. John, at Rome, iv. 165
  ―――― council, i. 110 _ter._, 318――ii. 125.――Councils, iv. 165
  Latin church, i. 115.――Its difference from the Greek, ii. 370
  ―――― service for churches, books of, called in, iii. 170 Latitude of
    Falmouth, ii. 23. Of the windmill near Fowey 48. Of Lansallas church 399
  ―――― and longitude of Eddystone lighthouse, iii. 376. Of the Land’s
    End 432. Of St. Minver spire and Pentire point 281. Of the Ram head
    375. Of Trevose head 281
  Latur, de, John and Richard, iv. 28
  Laud, Archbishop, iii. 71. His library and palace given to Mr.
    Peters 73
  Launcell’s manor, iii. 353.――House, iv. 18
  ―――― parish, i. 133――iv. 12, 15, 18, 23. Healthiness of, specimens
    of longevity in 18
  ―――― prior of, iv. 13
  Launceston borough, iii. 14――iv. 51.――Burgesses and charter, iii.
    15. Duke of Northumberland’s influence in 460. John Buller, M.P. for
    249. Edward Herle, M.P. for 41. Two Mr. Landews, M.P.s for 42
  ―――― Brygge, iv. 255
  ―――― castle, i 188――iii. 458
  ―――― church, iii. 45
  ―――― gaol, i. 345
  ―――― honor of, iii. 406
  ―――― manor, iv. 50
  ―――― parish, iii. 1, 2, 180, 335, 338, 457, 458 _bis_, 459, 461――iv.
    50, 51, 52.――Name, iii. 458
  LAUNCESTON or LANCESTON, St. Mary Magdalen parish, Hals’s MS. lost.
    By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, saint, Dunhevet, ii. 417.
    Its ruins, wells, rivulet, present town scantily supplied with
    water, inhabitants transferred to Launceston, privileges 418.
    Leland’s description, market place, St. Stephen’s church, castle,
    priory, tombs, St. Catherine’s chapel, Carew’s account, two boroughs
    419. Parishes of St. Thomas and St. Stephen, foundation of the town,
    increase of wealth, corporation, fairs, markets, assizes, a
    sanctuary, Castle Terrible, gaol, leather coins, friary and abbey
    420. Tonkin’s description of the castle, held by the Piper family,
    story of Sir Hugh Piper 421. Willis’s history of the borough,
    privileges granted by Richard Earl of Cornwall, assizes appointed by
    Richard 2nd, the property in the Duke of Cornwall 422. Corporation
    of 1620, market changed. By the Editor, magnificent remains of the
    castle, King’s hypothesis of its antiquity 423. Compared with
    Trematon and Tunbridge, the building 424. Etymology, also of
    Launceston, extent and wealth of the priory, wanton devastations of
    the 16th century 425. Destruction of documents, charters of Bishop
    Warlewast and Henry 3rd 426. Revenues of the priory 428. The same
    from the Augmentation office 429. Long the capital of Cornwall, the
    Earl’s residence transferred to Lestwithiel, the sessions to Truro,
    the county gaol and assizes to Bodmin, improvements in the town,
    roads through it 431. Effect of the Reform Bill, view magnificent,
    new iron bridge, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 432
  Launceston priory, iii. 14, 20, 44, 457――iv. 9, 17, 23, 60, 64. No
    remains of, St. Thomas’s church stands on its site 51.――Prior of, i.
    378 _bis_――iii. 457――iv. 15
  ―――― town, i. 77, 108, 163, 201, 283, 359, 381――iii. 358 _bis_, 388,
    417 _bis_, 456 _ter._, 461――iv. 81.――King’s audit at, i. 78.
    Insurgents march to 86.――Church of St. Stephen’s in, iii. 358.
    Friary in 457. Lines on the gate 295.――North gate of, iv. 51.
    Monastery at 11. Finer buildings in than Truro 71. Road from St.
    Columb’s to 46
  Launston, by Leland, iv. 291
  Laurence, Captain John, ii. 33. Built Trelisick house 32.――Rev.
    Thomas, of St. Winnow, iv. 155, 157
  ―――― St. etymology of name and his history, i. 88
  ―――― St. by Leland, iv. 261
  ―――― St. chapel, i. 88. Duty at 96
  ―――― St. village, i. 89. Court leet and market 90. Fairs 91
  Laurens, Rev. John, iii. 324
  Lavington, Dr. George, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 3, 42. His daughter 42
  Law, Noye’s Grounds, &c. of, iii. 154
  Lawanack parish, i. 21――iv. 68
  Lawanyke, ii. 430
  Lawarran, James, iv. 77
  Lawhitton parish, ii. 417
  Lawrance, St. i. 77
  Lawrence, Humphrey of Launceston, iii. 42
  ―――― St. chapel at Lezant, iii. 42
  ―――― St. village, ii. 385
  Lawry, i. 223――ii. 255.――Miss, iv. 117
  Lawyer, “Noye’s Complete,” iii. 154
  Lax’s tables of latitude and longitude, ii. 359
  Lazarus, parable of, iii. 400
  Lea, family changed their name to Kempthorne, iii. 255, 256
  ―――― farm, iii. 255
  Leach, Simon, i. 222.――Nicholas, iii. 358. Mr. executed 184
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408. Sir Simon and arms 408
  Lee, Francis, ii. 375
  Leeds, Francis and Thomas Osborne, Dukes of, i. 127.――Duke of, ii. 218
  Le Feock, ii. 25
  Lefisick manor, iii. 195, 196
  Legard, i. 370
  Legarike, ii. 256
  Legenda aurea, iv. 117
  Legge, Henry; William 4th Earl of Dartmouth, iii. 206
  Le Greice, Sir Robert, governor of St. Mawe’s castle, ii. 277
  Le Grice, his dispute with Cotterell, ii. 277.――Rev. C. V. iii. 58
    _bis_, 97. Family 90, 243
  Leicester, ii. 76
  Leigha, i. 145
  Leland, i. 73, 79, 146, 266 _bis_, 295, 355, 360, 372, 373――ii. 201,
    239, 402, 411, 425――iii. 5, 15, 16 _bis_, 17, 24, 26 _bis_, 277,
    278, 357, 404, 431――iv. 23, 24, 76 _ter._, 102.――His Itinerary, ii.
    2, 281――iii. 402, 404, 444.――Through Cornwall extracted, Appendix
    VII. iv. 256 to 292.――His inscription on the walls of St. Mawe’s
    castle, ii. 281. Account of Launceston 418.――His Collectanea, iii.
    332 _bis_, 385――iv. 117. Has well described the town of Truro 76, 78
    _bis_, 80. The description 76
  Lelant parish, i. 355, 364――ii. 119, 257 _bis_, 258 _ter._, 260,
    265, 270, 271, 272 _bis_, 284――iii. 46, 339, 384――iv. 52, 53 _ter._,
    58.――Valley in, iii. 59
  LELANT parish, Hals, lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, value of benefice, patronage, rectory, saint. By Editor,
    situation of church, overwhelmed with sand, iii. 5. Mr. Davies
    subscribed towards its erection, several inundations of sand,
    checked by planting rushes, town buried, name, division, Treadreath
    6. Villages, value of benefice, glebe, vicarage house buried, no
    resident clergyman, new house building, appropriation of tithes, St.
    Uny buried here, parish feast, Trembetha 7. Families of Praed,
    Hoskin, and Pawley, the last of the Pawleys, a great heiress, died
    in the workhouse, Praed estate inherited by the Mackworths 8.
    Character of Mr. H. Mackworth Praed 9; and of his son William. The
    Grand Junction canal, its utility, chalk ridges crossing England 10.
    Death of Mr. W. Praed, situation of Trevethow, Trencroben-hill,
    house improved by Mr. H. M. Praed, fine plantations 11. Statistics
    and Geology by Dr. Boase 12. Whele Reath 13
  Lelizike in Probus, iii. 423
  Lemain hamlet, iv. 25. Or Lammana seems to have been of importance 36
  Lemon, i. 58 _bis_. Caroline and Sir William 423.――Harriet, ii. 250.
    Col. John 85. William, his life 81. Saved several lives, was a tin
    smelter 82. Established a mine at Whele Fortune, his marriage 83.
    Made £10,000 by his mine, removed to Truro, principal merchant in
    Cornwall, a classical scholar, sheriff, magistrate, and M.P.,
    received a piece of plate from Frederick, Prince of Wales, called
    the great Mr. Lemon 84. His family, anecdotes of him 85. William,
    jun., 85 _bis_. Sir William 85, 100, 250. Mr. 33 _bis_, 134, 214,
    219.――John, iv. 33. Mr. 89 _bis_. Made a fortune at Truro, began his
    career at Penzance, chosen as partner by Mr. Coster of Truro 89
  ―――― of Carclew, Anna, iii. 230. Anne 249. Sir Charles, improved
    Carclew 230. Caroline, Harriet, and Jane 230. Colonel John, memoir
    of 229. A proficient in music 230. William 229. William, jun. 159.
    Sir William, memoir of 229. Improved Carclew, was a proficient in
    music 230. Sir William 249. Mr. 47. Mr. and Mrs. 229. The great Mr.
    Lemon the younger 159. Family 113
  Lennan, St. parish, ii. 283
  Lennard, i. 266
  Lentegles by Camelford, ii. 372
  Lentyon, ii. 91
  Leo, Pope, ii. 110 _ter._
  Leofric, the first Bishop of Exeter, ii. 69. Chaplain to Edward the
    Confessor 61 _bis_.――The last Bishop of Crediton, iii. 416
  Leofrick, dedicated a church to St. Walburg, iv. 125
  Leon, city of, iii. 285
  Leonard, St. lepers of, at Launceston, ii. 422
  Leonitus leonurus, iv. 182
  Leopards changed to lions, iv. 71
  Lepers, hospital for, i. 89. Laws relating to 90
  Lepomani, Aloysi, Bishop of Seville, i. 82
  Leprosy, its prevalence in England, i. 89
  Lerchdeacon, heir of, iii. 437
  Lerneth, i. 264
  Leryn barton, iv. 29 _bis_
  ―――― creek, iv. 30 _bis_
  Lescaddock castle, iii. 82
  Lescar’s castle, iv. 228
  Lescard, ii. 430
  Leschell, iii. 110
  Lescor, heir of, iii. 140
  Le Seur’s Histoire de l’Eglise et de l’Empire, iv. 117
  Leskeard castle, iii. 169
  ―――― church, i. 33
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 14
  ―――― parish, i. 195――ii. 291 _bis_, 388――iii. 167, 245, 260, 347,
    348 _bis_, 360
  LESKEARD parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, iii. 13. Patronage, value of benefice, appropriation of
    tithes, manor, town, privileges granted 14. Royalty in the duchy,
    charter 15. Elective franchise, great market, ancient castle 16.
    Conduit, extent of the town, a coinage town, defeat of the rebel
    army, market day, town hall, clock erected by Mr. Dolben,
    corporation plate 17. By Editor, trade and market, villas around,
    ib. Improvement of roads and canal, distinguished persons resident
    there, families of Jane and Taunton, Mr. Haydon, Dr. Cardew 18.
    Longitude determined by Mr. Haydon, Mr. Trehawke, his eccentric
    character, left his property to Mr. Kekewich, nunnery of Poor
    Clares, castle, schoolhouse, church 19. Towers taken down,
    appropriation of tithes, patron, monuments in church, memorials of
    Charles 1st, chief proprietors, Editor’s manor of Lamellin, borough,
    Reform Act, etymology 20. Statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    quarries. By Editor, fancied gold ore 21
  Leskeard prison, iii. 246
  ―――― town, iii. 173, 187, 246, 248. A coinage town, ii. 301――iv.
    186, 188.――Account of, iii. 14. Canal from East Looe to 120, 252.
    Road from Looe to 253. From Tor Point 439.――Roman causeway between
    Looe and, iv. 30. Charles first advanced to 185. Parliamentary
    officers brought prisoners to, King’s army marched out of 186
  Leskeret church, ii. 428
  Lesnewith hundred, i. 1, 60, 197, 304, 322――ii. 48, 86, 273, 401,
    402――iii. 22 _bis_, 222, 232, 274, 276, 352――iv. 61 _bis_, 66 _bis_,
    124, 125, 376
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 22, 23
  ―――― parish, i. 304――ii. 273 _bis_――iii. 232, 236
  LESNEWITH parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, hundred divided, value of benefice, incumbent, Trevygham.
    By Editor, Trewonell, iii. 22. Grylls manor, advowson, principal
    proprietor, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 23
  Lestormel castle, iii. 25
  L’Estrange’s Life of Charles 1st, iii. 145
  Lestwithiel parish, iv. 6, 29 _bis_, 30 _bis_, 109, 158
  LESTWITHIEL parish, Hals lost. Situation, boundaries, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbents, borough, name of the river,
    iii. 24. Ruins of the castle, Trinity chapel, old buildings used
    for the stannary court, Camden’s description, county town, prison
    25. Edmund Earl of Cornwall had his palace here, privileges
    conferred by Earl Richard, antiquity of its franchise, revenues of
    the corporation, damage done by the parliament army 26. The lords
    of the manor 27. Rent payable to the Duke, lies between hills,
    river navigable. By the Editor, locality, its beauty, seat of the
    duchy court, indebted to Richard King of the Romans, palace
    converted into a prison, charter of George 2nd 28. Its invalidity,
    church, town extends beyond the parish, statistics, incumbent,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 29
  Lestwithiel town, ii. 391, 392, 393――iv. 186.――A coinage town, ii.
    301. The residence of the Earl of Cornwall and called the county
    town 431. Mr. Vincent, M.P. for 227. Palace at 392.――Duchy exchequer
    at, iv. 99. Essex marched to 185. Encamped near 185, 186. The King
    did the same 186. Essex was surrounded near 187
  Letcot mine, ii. 378
  Lethbridge family, ii. 397.――Rev. C. H. iii. 461.――Rev. C. of Stoke
    Climsland, iv. 12. Rev. C. of St. Thomas 52
  ―――― of Madford, Christopher, ii. 377
  Letters to and from Mr. Moyle, ii. 76.――Various, to learned persons,
    by Farnaby, iv. 87
  Leucan, St. parish, ii. 283
  Levalra, i. 421
  Levan, St. parish, i. 138, 139――iii. 89, 290, 427, 428, 431
  LEVAN, ST. parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, saint, daughter church to St. Burian, iii. 30. By Editor, fine
    scenery, Trereen Dinas, the Loging Rock, natural ibid. Dr. Borlase’s
    account of it, stone removed by Lieut. Goldsmith 31. Sensation
    excited, Editor’s communication with government successful,
    subscription raised by him, replacing of the rock; Lanyon Cromlech
    also replaced, walk from Trereen Dinas to the church, Porth Kernow,
    church, St. Levina 32. Her relics, monument in the church, history
    of Miss Dennis 33. Her poetry, and Sophia St. Clare, a novel 34.
    Tol-Peder-Penwith, singular cavern under it, danger of two visitors,
    disinterestedness of a neighbouring farmer; Bosistow village,
    smallness of poor rate, and its cause 35. Parish feast, statistics;
    Geology by Dr. Boase, interesting construction and romantic
    appearance of the rocks, Logan Rock at Trereen and Tunnel Rock at
    Tol-Peder-Penwith. Editor’s explanation of the name Loging Rock 36
  Leveale, i. 142, 143. Lewis 142. Arms 143
  Leveddon family, ii. 399
  Levela family, iii. 216
  Levignus, Bishop of Kirton, i. 60
  Levina or Levine, St. iii. 30. Her history 32. Relics 33
  Levine Prisklo, by Leland, iv. 271
  Lewannack parish, ii. 226――iii. 40, 335
  LEWANNICK parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name,
    value of benefice, patronage, a poor parish, manor of Trelask, its
    etymology, Lower family, iii. 37. By Editor, gothic ornaments of the
    church and monuments ibid. Villages, manor of Trelaske and its
    possessors, Tinney Hall manor, etymology of Trelaske 38. Pollyfont
    manor, chapel, impropriation, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 39
  Lewellen in Gwythian, ii. 141
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of Minver, iii. 237
  Lewis 14th, King of France, ii. 112, 407. Mr. Killigrew’s repartee
    to 14. His generosity to the English driven on his coast 322
  Ley, i. 10. Hugh 10.――Rev. Samuel, ii. 356.――Rev. Hugh, of Redruth,
    iii. 380.――Rev. T. H. of Rame 379
  ―――― of Ponacumb family, iii. 226
  ―――― of Treworga Vean, Andrew, and arms, i. 396
  Leyden University, iii. 72. In Holland 188
  Lezant parish, ii. 226――iii. 1, 43, 335, 338――iv. 6. 7
  LEZANT parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, dedication, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    Trecarell, Landew, family of Trefusis, iii. 40. Of Herle 41. By
    Editor, hundred, Trecarrel ibid. Ancient hall and chapel at, Landew,
    Mr. Northmore Herle, chapel at Landew, and a third within the
    parish, Carthamartha, church 42. Monuments, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 43
  Lhuyd, Mr. i. 220.――His Archæologia, iii. 386
  Lhwyd, iv. 8
  Lichfield, St. Chad patron of, ii. 391
  ―――― and Coventry, Bishop of, William Lloyd, iii. 299. William Smith 141
  Lidain, mother of St. Perran, iii. 331
  Lidford borough, i. 170.――Versesm on, iii. 184
  ―――― castle, Devon, iii. 184 _bis_, 185
  ―――― law, iii. 184
  ―――― prisoners, iii. 184
  ―――― town, iii. 185
  Lidgate, John, i. 338
  Lidley, i. 412
  Lifton, Devon, ii. 122, 123
  Lighthouse, on St. Agnes island, ii. 358
  Lighthouses on Lizard Point, account of, ii. 358
  ―――― a triangle of in Guernsey, ii. 358
  Lightning, damage done to a church by, i. 216, 217.――Superstition
    connected with, iii. 48.――Warleggon church suffered from, iv. 130.
    And St. Wenn’s tower 138. Neglect of precautions against, and many
    church towers in Cornwall struck by 130
  Lightstone hundred, i. 369
  Ligusticum Cornubiense, iv. 178
  Lillo, author of George Barnewell, ii. 102, 104
  Lilly, William, i. 84 _bis_
  Limerick diocese, iii. 434
  Limestone burnt for manure, and extremely valuable, ii. 362
  Limmet, Nicholas, ii. 196
  Lincoln, i. 414, 415
  ―――― William Smith, Bishop of, iii. 141
  ―――― Clinton, Earl of, iii. 216
  Lincoln’s Inn, iii. 143, 152, 154
  Lincolnshire, chalk hills in, iii. 10
  Line, Samuel, i. 418
  Linkinhorne parish, iii. 40, 167――iv. 7, 9
  LINKINHORNE parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, iii. 43. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, manor of
    Carnadon Prior, the rocky hill 44. By the Editor, manors of Millaton
    and Carnadon Prior, Carraton downs, highest hill but one in
    Cornwall, royalist army there, manor of Trefrize, ib. Many elevated
    points and their prospects, Sharpy Tor, Cheesewring, the Hurlers,
    described in Bond’s sketches of East and West Looe, church rebuilt,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 45
  Linkynhorne, ii. 229
  Linnæus, ii. 331――iii. 49 _bis_
  Linnus, i. 197 _bis_
  Lionesse country, iii. 430. Its destruction 309. Editor’s opinion,
    attempt to restore it by an incantation 310
  Lisart, ii. 116
  Lisbon, iii. 423.――Fortune made at 17.――Packet boats receive
    despatches for, at Falmouth, ii. 11. Regular communication with
    Falmouth 18
  Liskard, by Leland, iv. 280
  Liske, Paganus de, i. 383
  Liskeard, i. 174, 177, 318, 411――ii. 76, 154
  Lisle, Alice de, iii. 92. Family 90.――Sir John, one of the original
    Knights of the Garter and his arms, ii. 137
  ―――― Thomas, Viscount, ii. 108
  Lismanock, ii. 203, 211
  List of the Dukes of Cornwall from the time of Edward 3rd, iv. 373
  Lister Killigrew, Mr. iii. 417 _ter._
  ―――― Martin, of Liston, Staffordshire, ii. 6
  Litchfield, Earl of, his letter, iii. 50
  Lithony, i. 420
  Lithospernum erubescens, iv. 182
  Littlecot, iii. 82
  Littleton, Miss, iv. 161
  ―――― of Lanhidrock, William, and arms, iii. 227
  Livesay of Livesay, i. 302. Mary 302
  Livings, five held by one clergyman, iii. 451. Accounted for by Mr.
    Whitaker 452
  Livingus, Abbot of Tavistock, and Bishop of Crediton, nephew of
    Burwoldus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Lizard or Lizart district, iii. 110, 126, 127, 180, 311, 418, 420,
    421. Etymology 422. Geology 424
  ―――― manor, ii. 126, 358
  ―――― peninsula, ii. 359
  ―――― point, ii. 106, 172, 247, 358 _bis_――iii. 423, 445. Anciently
    called the Ocrinum promontory, i. 20. Geological interest of 330,
    331. Lighthouses on 358. Description of them, latitude and
    longitude 359.――Name, iii. 375. Rocks at 283. High water at 98
  Lizard town, ii. 358
  Llan, Welch, i. 192
  Llan Badern Vaur, iii. 336
  Llewellin, Martin, his epitaph on Sir Beville Grenville, ii. 348
  Lloyd, William, Bishop of St. Asaph, Lichfield and Coventry, and
    Worcester, iii. 299
  Lluyd, ii. 173
  Llwyd, Edward, ii. 122
  Llwyn, Welch, i. 192
  Lo Poole, by Leland, iv. 268
  Lobelia crinus, iv. 182
  Lock, i. 211
  Lockyer of Roach, iii. 82
  Lodeneck, iii. 277
  Loe Bar near Helston, i. 136
  Loffyngeo, ii. 430
  Logan, Logging, or Loging Rock, i. 148――iii. 30, 36, 89――iv.
    164.――Name, iii. 36. Description and history of 31
  Loire, i. 107
  Lombard, Daniel, D.D. ii. 406. Vicar of Lanteglos 401. His history,
    had his living from George 2nd, was member of a German club with
    some of the royal family, visited Mr. Gregor, had no other
    acquaintance in Cornwall, a profound scholar, some anecdotes of him
    407. His death, he left a valuable library to his successors 408
  London, i. 242, 341, 356, 404――ii. 28, 30, 47, 98, 101 _bis_, 177,
    192, 213, 227 _bis_, 266, 267, 407 _bis_――iii. 85, 96, 142, 188,
    189, 264, 288, 316, 450――iv. 86.――Bath free stone brought to, i. 58.
    Rebels approach 87.――Two brothers from Bodmin went to seek their
    fortunes at, ii. 34. The owners of the Virginia fleet in 42. King
    Richard after his imprisonment returned to 179. St. Mellitus, Bishop
    of, its two cathedrals founded by him 288.――Hospital of the Knights
    of St. John in, iii. 78. Society for purchasing advowsons in 399.
    Mr. Peters arrives, as commissioner of grievances from America in
    73. Richard Chiverton Lord Mayor of 162.――Sir John Collet and Sir
    John Percivall Lord Mayors of, iv. 134. Thomas Bradbury, Hugh
    Clopton, Stephen Jennings and John Percivall, sheriffs of 134
  London architecture reaching to Cornwall, iv. 81
  ―――― Bishop of, iii. 73. Mellitus the first Bishop 167
  ―――― bridge, partly built of Cornish stone, iii. 63. High tide at
    98. Time occupied in flowing to it round the southern coast 99
  ―――― coffers, iii. 248
  ―――― Gazette, iii. 143
  ―――― newspapers received daily at Penzance, i. 59
  ―――― port of, iii. 450
  ―――― road, to Falmouth, ii. 104, 355. To Land’s End 317. Through St.
    Bennet’s valley 387. Through Launceston 431
  ―――― stools and tables, iii. 248
  ―――― tower of, ii. 170
  ―――― wall, iii. 298
  Londonderry, Thomas Pitt Earl of, and Ridgeway Earl of, i. 69
  Long, Thomas, iii. 38
  ―――― of Penheale, J. S. i. 379, 380. Margaret 380. Thomas 378, 379.
    Arms 378.――Thomas, ii. 398, 399 _bis_;――or Penhele family, iv. 45
  Longbound, Thomas, i. 373 _ter._, 374
  Longbridge, ii. 120, 176
  Longchamp, William, Bishop of Ely, Regent for Richard 1st, his
    misgovernment, deposed, ii. 177. His escape 178
  Longer of Tregonnebris, Mr. anecdote of, iii. 427
  Longeville, Mr. ii. 120
  Longinus, by the Rev. J. Toup, ii. 266
  Longitude of Pendennis castle, ii. 23. Of the wind-mill near Fowey
    48. Of Landsallas church 399
  ―――― board of, published Meyer’s tables, ii. 222
  Longitudes, derived at sea from the moon’s place, ii. 222
  Longman and Co. iii. 96
  Longporth, now London, i. 338
  Longships, iii. 432
  Longstone downs, ii. 271
  Longunnet barton, iv. 29
  Lonsallos, i. 264
  Loo bar, ii. 129
  ―――― river, i. 179 _bis_, 318, 320――ii. 291.――Source of, i. 184
  Looe bar, iii. 447
  ―――― borough, iii. 119.――Account of 119
  ―――― bridge, iv. 30
  ―――― church, iii. 378
  ―――― cove, iii. 129
  ―――― harbour, iv. 19
  ―――― haven, iii. 118, 119
  ―――― island, iv. 25, 28
  ―――― parish, ii. 85, 400
  ―――― pool, ii. 126, 155, 158――iii. 126, 441. Description of 443.
    Sand bank across 443, 444. Account of the trout in 442, 443
  ―――― river, iii. 119, 121, 128, 245, 252, 291――iv. 23.――Royalty of,
    iii. 442
  ―――― town, i. 379――iv. 29, 30 _ter._, 36, 124.――Marble rock near, i.
    187.――Canal to Leskeard from, iii. 18. Road to 439 _bis_. From
    Leskeard 253.――Trade of, iv. 36
  ―――― East, borough, by Hals, etymology, commerce, chapel, manor,
    charter, members of parliament, jurisdiction, iii. 119. Market,
    fairs, arms, writ 119. Tonkin 120. Editor, Bond’s topographical
    sketches, disfranchisement, canal, projected road over Dartmoor
    ibid. Situation, built on a beach, Mr. Bond 121. John Buller, M.P.
    for 249
  ―――― East, town, iii. 119――iv. 20, 21. A celt found at 33. Bridge
    from West Looe to 20
  ―――― East and West, iii. 229, 246.――Boroughs, iv. 29.――Bond’s
    history of, iii. 246, 378.――Surrounded by water, iv. 35
  ―――― West, borough, corporation, and history, iv. 28. Constitution
    20, 28. Writ 20. Seal and arms 21. Inferior to East Looe 20. Mayor
    and burgesses 34. Poor 35. Admiral Sir Charles Wager, M.P. for
    38.――John Rogers, M.P. for, iii. 445
  ―――― West, down, iv. 29 _bis_, 31, 32, 33. Its inclosure desirable
    34. Part of, let 35. Thunderbolt found in 32
  ―――― West, town, i. 84――iii. 119, 300――iv. 25; or Portuan,
    etymology, bridge to East Looe 28
  Loow, Est and West, by Leland, iv. 290
  Lords Spiritual, their precedency disputed, denied by parliament,
    ii. 181
  Lorraine, St. Dye’s church in, ii. 131
  Lostwhythyel, by Leland, iv. 290
  Lostwithiel, i. 78, 127.――ii. 38, 41 _ter._, 422.――By Leland, iv. 277
  Louer, West, or Consort Hundred, i. 38
  Louis, i. 247 _bis_.――Family, iii. 64 _bis_
  Louisberg harbour, iii. 218
  Love of Penzance, Mr. iii. 84
  Lovell, John, i. 246
  Lovice, William, William, Leonard, iv. 41
  Low Countries, iv. 86
  Lowbrygge, iv. 255
  Lower, Dr. Richard, Thomas, i. 257.――Sir Nicholas, ii. 372 _bis_,
    373 _sex._, 374, 376. Lady 373. Major 375. Family 372, 373, 397.
    Distinguished 376.――Humphrey, iii. 358. Thomas 38. Family 37, 38,
    223. Monuments to 225.――Dr., Physician to Charles II. and his three
    daughters, iv. 94
  ―――― of Trelaske, in Lawanack, Sir Nicholas, his marriage and dau.
    William, and William, iv. 156
  ―――― of Tremeer, Richard, M. D. his works, iv. 98. Sir William, his
    works 97. His death 98
  ―――― of St. Wenow, or Winnow, Sir Nicholas, iii. 200. Heir 201.
    Family 133.――Mr. iv. 94
  ―――― Town, of Lambrigan, iii. 315
  Lowlands, iii. 240
  Lowlog river, source of, iv. 237
  “Lucan’s Pharsalia,” notes on, iv. 87
  Lucas, Elizabeth, i. 222
  ―――― of Warwickshire, Mary, iii. 147
  Lucca, iv. 126
  Lucian, ii. 76
  Lucies manor, account of, ii. 358
  Lucius, i. 335 _ter._
  Lucy family, iv. 121; or Lacan, Richard 77, 81 _quat._, 82 _bis_,
    83, 84 _bis_
  ―――― of Charlecote, George, bought the manor of Fowey, M.P. for it,
    ii. 46
  Lud, King, ii. 50
  Luddra, Robert, iii. 253
  Ludduham, now Lugian-lese manor, ii. 257. Account of 258
  Ludewin, or Ludevaulles, by Leland, iv. 265
  LUDGEAN, LUDGVAN, or LUDGVEN, parish, Hals lost. Situation,
    boundaries, name, value of benefice, patron, manor of Ludgian
    lease, iii. 46. By Editor, extent and consequence of the manor
    ibid. Treassow, Castle-an-Dinas, very lofty, produces china-clay,
    entrenchment, Rosevithney, Trowell, the mine of Whele Fortune,
    well resorted to for restoring sight 47. Collurian farm, Varfull,
    belonging to the Davy family, notice of Sir Humphrey Davy, the
    church, rectory house, church tower, a pinnacle thrown down by
    lightning, imputed to a perturbed spirit, a legend of St. Ludgvan,
    and a stream of miraculous water 48. Dr. William Borlase, rector,
    his learning and works, diploma from Oxford 49. Earl of
    Litchfield’s letter upon it, extract from the university official
    register 50. Memoir of Dr. Borlase from the Biographical
    Dictionary 51. List of his works 52. His death, correspondence
    with pope, communications to the royal society, pupils, tomb,
    inscription illegible, Editor’s reflections on him in Greek, his
    two sons 53. Two rectors since, present incumbent, chief
    proprietors of land, parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 54. Ludgvan stone, marshes 55
  Ludgian, ii. 260
  ―――― or Ludgvan Lease manor, iii. 123. Account of 46 _bis_
  Ludgvan parish, i. 355――ii. 118 _bis_, 121 _bis_, 169――iii. 5,
    343――iv. 52, 53 _bis_, 54.――Rev. John Stephens, rector of, ii.
    270.――Rev. H. Praed, iii. 9, 54
  ―――― St. a stream endowed with miraculous powers by, iii. 48
  ―――― stone, iii. 55
  Ludlow of London, i. 255. Elizabeth 259
  Luffe, ii. 427
  Lugacius, Bishop, iii. 331
  Lugad, Bishop, iii. 331
  Luggan, Mr. ii. 252
  Luggyan Lese manor, ii. 258
  Luke, Robert, iii. 83. Dr. Stephen 96, 337 _bis_
  ―――― of Trevilles, William, and family, iii. 406
  ―――― St. ii. 240. His day 117, 276
  Lukey, Mr. i. 271
  Lunar tables, ii. 223
  Lundy island, i. 188.――View of, ii. 49
  Lupton, in Brixham parish, Devon, iv. 156
  Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, ii. 64
  ―――― St. ii. 73, 74
  ―――― Hugh, Earl of Chester, iv. 125
  Lure, i. 221
  Lurginus, Bishop of Kirton, iv. 62
  Lusus naturæ, supposed, ii. 297
  Luther, Martin, i. 312
  Lutterell, i. 247
  ―――― of Polsew, i. 393
  Luttrell, i. 400, 402.――Sir Andrew, iii. 103
  ―――― of Dunster castle, Andrew and his daughter, iii. 342
  Luxemberg, John of, King of Bohemia, iv. 72
  Luxilian church, iv. 100
  ―――― parish, ii. 93, 155, 384, 390; or Luxillian, iii. 391, 395
  LUXILIAN or LUXULIAN parish, Hals’s MS. lost. Situation, boundaries,
    name, change of saint, iii. 55. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, manor of Prideaux, etymology, Prideaux castle, and family
    56. By Editor, chief landowners, Rashleigh family, situation of
    church, taste of Mr. Grylls the present vicar, beauty of church and
    tower, room in the tower, archives preserved there in the civil
    wars, vale leading to St. Blazey bridge, Tonkin’s Geology, “Lyell’s
    Principles of Geology,” parish, statistics 57. Geology by Dr. Boase,
    stream-works, quality of the tin, subterranean trees and plants 58.
    By Editor, unsightliness of Cornish valleys, Mr. H. M. Praed
    restored a valley in Lelant to beauty 59
  Luxmoore, Rev. Coryndon, ii. 408
  Luxton, John, i. 399
  Luxulion, i. 52
  Lyda, or Lides, St. island, iv. 230, 266
  Lydcott, iii. 252
  Lyddra, Robert, iii. 257
  Lydford Brygge, iv. 255
  Lyell, Charles, on Geology, iii. 57
  Lyle, John, rang the bells on the accession of George III. George
    IV. and William IV. iv. 18
  Lynar, or Lyner river, iii. 119, 437, 438
  Lyne, Rev. Charles, of Roach, iii. 401. Rev. Richard, of Little
    Petherick 335. Rev. Dr. of Mevagissey, his singularities 194. Mr.
    made a fortune at Lisbon 17. His grandfather 19
  Lynkinhorne, ii. 430
  Lyonness, i. 198
  Lyskerde, ii. 430
  Lysons, i. 135, 146, 356, 369, 399, 402――ii. 86, 87, 91, 100, 147,
    149 _bis_, 153, 217, 229, 231, 232, 252, 256, 281, 294, 330, 348,
    358, 362, 363 _bis_, 383, 388, 395, 397 _bis_, 400, 404, 412,
    415――iii. 7 _bis_, 19, 20, 38, 46, 77, 90, 117 _bis_, 126 _bis_, 138
    _bis_, 150, 172, 192, 223 _bis_, 232, 234, 239, 240, 248, 255 _bis_,
    258, 261, 274, 276 _bis_, 288, 289, 295, 309 _bis_, 332, 334, 335,
    342, 346 _bis_, 350 _bis_, 352, 372 _bis_, 373, 398, 399 _bis_, 405,
    406, 419, 424, 427, 439 _bis_, 445, 458――iv. 3, 4, 9 _bis_, 16
    _bis_, 26, 41, 44, 51, 60, 62, 64, 65, 67, 97, 107, 114, 121, 127,
    130, 136, 141.――His Cornwall, i. 228, 266 _bis_, 315 _bis_, 340――ii.
    343――iii. 80――iv. 141, 163.――His Magna Brit. ii. 47――iv. 26.――His
    account of the repulse of the French from Fowey, ii. 46. His
    descents, &c. of manors 47
  Lythe, John Robert, iii. 387
  Lyttelton, Christiana, and George, Lord, i. 69
  Lyttleton family, ii. 383

  Mabe hill, iii. 63
  ―――― parish, i. 137, 236, 416――ii. 92, 94, 104――iii. 64――iv. 2
  MABE parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, name, iii.
    59. Ancient jurisdiction, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    amount of land tax, Tremough, Tremayne 60. By Tonkin, name, Carnsew,
    and family, removed to Trewoon, Carverth 61. Tremogh, large house
    built, Hantertavas 62. By Editor, Hals’s mistaken etymology of
    Tremogh, Tremogh sold 62. Trees cut down, granite quarries, road
    turned, rare plant, origin of the Tremayne family, statistics 63.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 64
  MABEN, or Mabin, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient state, value of benefice, patron, iii. 64. Incumbent, land
    tax, St. Mabiana, Collquite, Treblithike, Haligan 65. Penwyne 66.
    Tonkin, nothing new. By Editor, Tredeathy, church monuments 66. Mr.
    Peters, his controversy with Warburton, his ancestry, and life 67.
    Traits of character, extracts from his meditations 68. Opinions on
    the Book of Job 69. Remarks on Hugh Peters, his history 71.
    Settlement in America, a popular preacher, deputed to England 72.
    Entered the parliament service, obtained Lambeth palace and Laud’s
    library, his death 73. Parish statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 74
  Mabiana, St. iii. 65
  Mabilia, a countess, monument to, ii. 419
  Mabin, i. 2
  Mabyn, St. church, iv. 135
  ―――― St. parish, i. 84, 367, 371, 375――ii. 150 _bis_, 332――iv. 93, 95
  Macarmicke, Colonel, i. 208
  Macclesfield, Fitton Gerard, Earl of, i. 67.――Lord, iii. 378 _bis_
  Macculloch, Dr. ii. 115
  M Gregor, i. 13
  Machinery, curious piece of, i. 55
  Mackworth, Mr. singular story of, and family, iii. 9
  Macpherson, the producer of Ossian, ii. 405. His quarrel with
    Johnson 406
  Madan, a British king, iii. 79
  Madaran, or Maddern parish, ii. 118, 122, 174
  Madarne church, i. 296
  ―――― parish, iv. 164 _bis_
  Maddarns, St. or Maddern well, account of, iii. 91. Extraordinary
    cure from 79
  Maddern, John and William, iii. 83
  ―――― parish, iii. 46, 242 _bis_, 243, 283, 289, 425 _bis_
  MADDERN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, saint, unknown, iii. 78.
    St. Maddarn’s well, a cripple cured by it, Alverton 79. Mayne
    Screffes, inscription on the stone, Landithy 80. Penzance, town
    burnt by the Spaniards, charter, taken and pillaged by the
    parliament army 81. Rich booty, a coinage town, principal
    inhabitants, arms, writ, Lescaddock castle 82. By Tonkin, a
    vicarage, patron, incumbent ibid. Penzance, a separate parish, but
    daughter-church, incorporated, corporation in 1620. By the Editor,
    situation of the church, its connection with the Templars,
    monuments, mild air of the Mount’s Bay, Castle Horneck 83. Dr.
    Walter Borlase, memoir of him, built the house at Castle Horneck,
    Trereife, memoir of Dr. Frank Nicholls 84. Trengwainton used as a
    farm-house, Sir Rose Price, the present owner, has made it a
    splendid residence, origin of the Price family 85. History of Mr.
    Vinicombe 87. His picture, Rosecadgwell, Nanceolvern, Poltare,
    Trenear, notice of Captain H. P. Tremenheere 88. Rose hill,
    Lariggan, Mr. Pope and the Vatican, Lanyon, a cromleigh 89.
    Cromleigh at Malfra, and others in the parishes of Morva and
    Zennor, conjectures respecting them, description, etymology,
    Landithy, impropriation of tithes, patronage of the vicarage,
    Alverton 90. Its magnificence lost, Maddern well, its copiousness,
    Penzance flourishing, its gradual rise 91. Market house, a coinage
    town, adverse events of the civil war, pier, character of the
    corporation 92. Chapel of ease, endowed by Mr. Tremenheere, new
    church, exertions of Mr. Vibert, Mr. Edward Giddy, and the
    Tremenheere family, for the benefit of the town 93. New market
    house, distinguished families of the place, the Tonkins, Sir
    Humphrey Davy, introduced by the Editor to Dr. Beddoes 94. His
    Life by Dr. Paris, Dr. Batten, Mr. Carne, Dr. Boase 95. Mr. Thomas
    Giddy, Dr. Luke, Admiral Pellew, a grammar-school, Editor there
    under Dr. Parkins 96. Mr. Morris, the present master, Penzance
    much resorted to by invalids, Mr. E. Giddy’s observation on the
    climate, Dr. Paris’s medical account of it, Algerine corsair
    wrecked there 97. Inhabitants alarmed, afterwards visited the
    strangers, they were sent home in a man-of-war, latitude and
    longitude of Penzance church, establishment of the port, and at
    various other places 98. Parish statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    the Wherry mine 99. Sand bank and submarine forest, parish covered
    with metallic veins, account of the Cornwall Geological Society at
    Penzance 100
  Madders parish, ii. 284
  Madford near Launceston, iii. 337
  Madras, Fort St. George, and government house at, iv. 11
  Madron parish, iii. 245
  Maen Tol, i. 141
  Magdalen Ball in Gluvias, iv. 3
  ―――― college, Oxford, iii. 87
  ―――― hall, Oxford, Mr. Lake entered of, ii. 389
  Mahomet’s character of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 368
  Mahometans, ii. 37
  Mahon, Sir Reginald, ii. 376. Family 339, 353, 354, 396. Property
    353, 376.――Family, iii. 8. Property 207
  Mahun family, iv. 54
  Maids, the nine, iv. 2
  Maidstone frigate, iii. 186.――Commanded by Captain Penrose, ii. 25.
    Sailed to the Sound 27
  Mail coaches established, i. 57
  Maine and Loire, department of, in France, iv. 105
  Maiowe, Philip, iii. 123
  Majendie, Ashurst, instituted the Geological Society of Cornwall,
    iii. 100. His Geology of the Lizard 424
  Major, Peter, of Foye, ii. 110. Mr. 43. Mr. a tobacco merchant 43
  Maker parish, ii. 250, 251――iii. 374
  MAKER parish, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, Mount Edgecumbe, history of
    the Edgecumbe family, Sir Richard an adherent of Henry 7th, iii.
    101. Obliged to abscond, concealed himself in a cave, and deceived
    his pursuers by throwing his cap into the sea, rewarded by Henry
    with the lands of Bodrigan 102. Built a chapel in commemoration of
    his escape, he or his father founded a Benedictine priory, family
    have spent their fortune in service of the crown 103. Carew’s
    description of Mount Edgecumbe, part of it and of Millbrook in
    Devon 104. Millbrook once possessed of the elective franchise,
    inhabitants in Elizabeth’s time addicted themselves to piracy,
    Cremble passage, its danger 105. Tonkin does not notice this
    parish. By Editor, beautiful situation, church ibid. Signals from
    it, observations on signals, value of the benefice 106. Inceworth,
    Millbrook formerly an important town, government naval brewhouses
    removed, advantage of the new buildings, Vaultershome, or West
    Stonehouse, now Mount Edgecumbe, its beauty 107. Kingston and
    Cawsand, Plymouth harbour, divisions of, the Breakwater or
    artificial reef, description of 108. Comparison of its bulk,
    weight, and labour with the great Pyramid of Egypt, parish
    statistics, population fluctuates with war or peace, vicar 109.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 110
  Makertone manor, ii. 251
  Malachi, the Hebrew prophet, ii. 224
  Malachy, St. Archbishop of Armagh, ii. 225
  Malaga, i. 161
  Malivery, Helvethus, iv. 41
  Mallett, i. 262
  Malmsbury, iv. 155
  ―――― William of, iii. 385――iv. 96.――His chronicle, i. 407
  Malo, St. iii. 257. His day 258
  Malo’s, St. ii. 123
  Malta island, i. 411
  ―――― knights of, i. 411 _bis_
  Mama Tidy, a name of St. Udith, iv. 93
  Man, Isle of, i. 339. King of 339
  Manaccan parish, i. 417――iii. 124, 127, 128, 138
  MANACCAN parish, situation, boundaries, name modern, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax, iii. 110. Once
    called Minster, alien monasteries, etymology, Kestell 111. By
    Tonkin, name. By Editor, etymology, church pleasantly situated, town
    neat, vicarage house good, Mr. Polwhele 112. Helford, passage at,
    Kestell, Halvose, statistics, parish feast, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase, titanium found in the streams 113
  Manackan, i. 38
  Manacles point, ii. 331
  Manaton, account of by Hals, ii. 230. By Tonkin ibid. By Whitaker
    and Lysons 231
  ―――― of Manaton family, ii. 230. Francis 230 _bis_. Henry 230. Arms
    and memorials in church 231.――Francis, iii. 2――iv. 64. Family 65
  Mane mine, i. 226
  Manely manor, iv. 112
  ―――― Coleshill manor, iv. 114
  Maneton, Mr. entertained Charles 1st, iii. 42
  Manley, John and Mrs. iii. 347
  ―――― Coleshill, i. 319
  Manlius, iii. 71
  Manly, John, iv. 74
  Mann, Rev. H. of St. Mawgan, iii. 138
  Mannering, i. 350
  Manning family, iii. 255
  Mannington, Sampson, iii. 358
  Manor courts, proceedings of, iv. 55. Subjects of presentment 56
  Manufactory for Spa ornaments, ii. 361
  Manuscripts in the British Museum, extracts from, iii. 409
  Manwaring, Charlotte, i. 67
  Mapowder, i. 402――iv. 161 _bis_
  Marazion, the name of St. Hilary parish, ii. 200, 214, 215 _quat._,
    224 _bis_
  ―――― borough and manor, ii. 170
  ―――― parish, iii. 289――iv. 10.――Road to Helston from, iii. 446. From
    Redruth to 308.――Name explained, iv. 316
  March ab Meircyon, i. 338
  March, Earl of, i. 168 _bis_
  March and Ulster, Roger Mortimer Earl of, i. 64
  Margaret, Queen, i. 169.――Took sanctuary in Beaulieu abbey, ii. 329
  ―――― St. family, ii. 362
  Margaret’s, St. church, Westminster, ii. 98
  Margate, high water at, iii. 98
  Marghessen foos, iii. 323 _bis_, 324 _ter._ Account of 323
  Marham or Marwyn church, manor of, iii. 116, 117
  Marham Church parish, i. 133――ii. 413――iii. 254, 352――iv. 12, 15,
    131, 152
  MARHAM CHURCH parish, situation and boundaries, name and antiquity,
    the Conqueror’s charter of appropriation, iii. 114. Confirmed by the
    pope, number of vicarages in England, and in Cornwall, Walesbury
    115. Longford hill 116. By Tonkin, name, value, manor of Marwyn
    Church ibid. By Editor, antiquity of the church, manor, Walesborough
    manor, Hilton manor, Wood-Knole, patron, nature of the soil,
    abundance of wood 117. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 118
  Marhasdeythyou, or Market Jew, by Leland, iv. 287
  Marianus the historian, ii. 403
  Mark St. his day, iv. 140
  ―――― well, i. 199
  Marke of Woodhill, i. 143
  Markesju, by Leland, iv. 264
  Market Jew, ii. 200
  Marks of St. Wenn, Miss, iii. 237
  Markwell manor, ii. 363
  Marlborough, ii. 76
  ―――― administration, ii. 217
  ―――― castle, ii. 179
  ―――― Duke of, ii. 307.――John Churchill, i. 126 _bis_,
    234.――Churchill, iii. 217, 297.――Henrietta, Duchess, i. 126
  Marney of Colquita, Henry first Lord Marney, i. 369
  ―――― of Essex, Henry, family and arms, iii. 65.――Family, iv. 22
  Maroons of Jamaica, treaty with, iii. 300
  Marperion rock, iii. 73
  Marre, Lord, ii. 9
  Marrifield, i. 215
  Mars, i. 295.――Camelford sacred to, ii. 403
  Marsh, Rev. William, ii. 134
  Marshal, Earl, his court, iii. 129, 130 _ter._
  Marshall, Miss, iii. 239
  Martial’s epigrams, notes on, iv. 87
  Martin, i. 386. John, Archbishop of Canterbury 87.――John and Thomas,
    iii. 323
  Martin of Hurston, Anne and John, iii. 186
  ―――― of Pittletown, Dorset, family, iii. 186
  ―――― St. his feast and history, ii. 125.――His day, iii. 310
  ―――― Bishop of Tours in France, iii. 118, 126, 127, 138. His history
    122. Festival 127
  ―――― Pope and martyr, iii. 126
  Martin’s, St. church, iii. 252 _bis_. At Leskeard 16
  ―――― fields and woods, i. 15
  ―――― island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  ―――― parish by Looe, i. 320――ii. 265――iii. 13, 245.――Its church and
    rectory, ii. 266
  MARTIN’S, ST. parish, near Looe, situation, boundaries, saint, value
    of benefice, patron, iii. 118. Incumbent, land tax, East Looe town,
    etymology, haven, chapel, charter, jurisdiction, market and fairs,
    arms and writ, Kevorall 119. Tonkin’s quotation of Willis, and
    conjecture respecting the name of the chapel 120. By Editor,
    reference to Bond’s Sketches, elective franchise lost, canal to
    Leskeard, granite hills ibid. Road over the hills, projected new
    road, expence will probably prevent it, situation of East Looe, Mr.
    Bond 121. History of St. Martin of Tours, legends of him, his death
    122. Festival, advowson of the living, monuments in the church. Dr.
    Mayo, statistics 123. Geology by Dr. Boase 124
  ―――― St. parish, in Meneage, i. 301――ii. 318――iii. 110, 127, 128
  MARTIN’S ST. parish, in Meneage, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, daughter to Mawgan, founder, patron, incumbent,
    land tax, Tremayne, iii. 124. Mudgan 125. By Tonkin, saint, daughter
    to Mawgan, value, patron, incumbent 126. By Editor, Tremayne,
    Helnoweth nunnery, doubtful, Meneage district, Hals’s history of St.
    Martin, pope and martyr ibid. Parish feast, notice of Pope St.
    Martin, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, the dry tree 127
  Martin, St. of Tours, ii. 125
  ―――― ancient chapel of, i. 15.――Church, ii. 125
  Martine’s, St. isle, iv. 266
  Martyn, i. 28.――Thomas, ii. 221 _bis_. His map of Cornwall ibid. and
    iii. 454.――W. W. iii. 255
  Martyn’s, St. parish in Kerrier, iii. 61
  Martyr’s church, iii. 180
  Martyrology, iii. 385
  Mary, Queen, ii. 255, 336, 404, 423――iii. 103, 104, 125, 133, 140,
    370――iv. 2, 140.――A design to rob her Exchequer, ii. 198
  ―――― 2nd, called Mary Take-all, ii. 15
  ―――― Rose frigate, loss of, ii. 341, 344
  ―――― the Virgin, ii. 276――iv. 26
  ―――― St. iii. 285.――Truro church, dedicated to, iv. 80, 81
  ―――― St. bell, iii. 210
  ―――― St. chapel, Dublin cathedral, iv. 147
  ―――― St. chapel in Quethiock, iii. 373
  ―――― St. church, Savoy, London, ii. 98
  ―――― St. island, iv. 172, 174, 230. Extent of 175
  ―――― St. manor, ii. 275
  ―――― St. parish, old Truro, iv. 92
  ―――― St. of Grace’s Abbey, i. 134
  ―――― St. de Theresa, i. 83
  ―――― Magdalen, St. a chapel at Trecarrell, dedicated to, iii. 42
  ―――― Magdalen, St. church at Launceston, ii. 417, 420――iv.
    132――Parish, statistics, ii. 432
  ―――― de Plym, St. ii. 2, 275, 276
  ―――― de Vale, St. convent, prior of, ii. 275 _bis_, 276. Monastery
    2.――Priory, iii. 395
  ―――― Wick, St. parish, ii. 232――iii. 114
  ―――― Wike, St. i. 215
  Maskelyne, Rev. Dr. Nevill, astronomer royal, his voyage to St.
    Helena, published Meyer’s Tables, ii. 222. Devised the Nautical
    Almanack 223
  Mason, Rev. J. H. of Treneglos and Warbstow, iv. 63.――The poet, i. 71
  Masterman of Restormel, William, i. 244 _bis_
  Matilda, Queen, ii. 211 _ter._
  Matthew of St. Kew family, arms, ii. 337
  Matthew Paris, i. 414
  ―――― of Westminster, his story of the Irish sailing to England in an
    ox-skin boat, ii. 324
  ―――― St. his Gospel, ii. 168
  Matthews of Tresangar, i. 225. John 383 _bis_
  Maugan, i. 209, 212, 301――ii. 155
  ―――― in Meneage, ii. 136
  Maunder, i. 256, 396.――Henry, ii. 195.――Miss, iv. 116
  ―――― of Lanhedrar, Mary, Priscilla, and Thomas, i. 420
  ―――― of Rosecorla, Edward, i. 420
  Maurandia Barclayana, iv. 182
  ―――― semperflorens, iv. 182
  Maurice, Prince, iii. 44.――A commissioner for the King, iv. 189
  Mausa, St. by Leland, iv. 289
  Maw’s, St. castle, inscription made by Leland at, iv. 274
  Mawe, St. his history, ii. 280
  Mawes, St. borough, ii. 279. Account of and arms 276
  ――――’s, St. castle, ii. 1, 2, 27, 279, 280. History of 280. And of
    its governors 276. Its governors and officers salaried by the crown 278
  ――――’s, St. manor, ii. 275
  ――――’s, St. town, ii. 2, 17
  ――――’s, St. village, ii. 280
  Mawgan, John de, iii. 148
  ―――― of Essex family, and arms, iii. 148
  ―――― or St. Mawgan parish in Kerrier, or Mawgan Meneage, ii.
    126――iii. 110, 124, 126, 148, 257, 324, 332, 419
  ―――― in Pider, i. 161, 230, 404, 407――ii. 256――iii. 398. The poor of 153
  ―――― St. iii. 148
  ―――― St. church, iii. 132
  MAWGAN, St. in Meneage parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    ancient name, iii. 127. Value of benefice, patron, founder,
    incumbent, land tax, description of Meneage district, its
    fertility and breeds of cattle, Goonhilly downs, stones on them,
    Carmenow 128. Its etymology, and the family of Carmenow, singular
    trial between them and the Lord Scrope for their arms 129. Reasons
    on each side 130. Earl Marshal’s sentence, Carmenow’s displeasure
    131. Domestic chapel, burial place and monuments, cross-logged
    figures used before the crusades 132. Reskymer family, Trelowarren
    133. Vyvyan family 134. Tonkin has no additions. By Editor, the
    three distinguished families, Sir Richard Vyvyan a Cavalier 135.
    Committed to the Tower by George 1st, had a daughter born there
    136. Sir R. R. elected for Bristol, antiquity and splendour of
    Trelowarren house, view in Dr. Borlase’s Natural History, manor of
    Carmenow, account of the trial in Anecdotes of Heraldry 137.
    Another controversy for the same coat, church, monuments, patron
    of benefice, saint, feast, statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase, the dry tree 138
  MAWGAN, ST. parish in Pyder, by Hals, boundaries, ancient name,
    antiquity of the parish, founder, dedication, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, manor of Lanherne, iii. 139. Arundell
    family 140. Origin of their arms 142. Mr. Bishop, a Roman Catholic
    prelate, Carnanton, history of Attorney-General Noye 143. Approved
    the ship-money tax 144. Hammon Le Strange’s character of him, his
    death and family, amusing story of the court dining with him 145.
    Ben Jonson’s lines, and Charles’s answer, anagram, Noye, a
    promoter of the Civil War, counselled the imprisonment of the
    members of parliament 146. Densill, Densill barrow, Chapel Garder,
    Densill family 147. Tonkin, the saint, an Irish Missionary,
    patron, ancient name 148. Manor of Lanhearne, Camden and Carew
    upon the Arundells 149. Called the Great Arundells 150. By Editor,
    etymology of Arundell, Lysons’s notice of the family, Popery
    fostered at Lanhearne, house now a Carmelite nunnery ibid.
    Situation of church, monuments 151. Manor of Carnarton, memoir of
    the Noyes, the Attorney-General’s will 152. Some of his works
    published 153. List of them 154. A cause he gained for his
    college, their thanks 155. His picture, a copy of it presented by
    the Editor to Exeter college, his family, marriage contract of his
    son Humphrey 156. Issue of the marriage 159. Works of the Rev.
    Cooper Willyams, anecdote of his grandfather’s marriage, Hals’s
    abuse of Colonel Noye, parish statistics, and rector 160. Geology
    by Dr. Boase, parish feast 161
  Mawnan parish, i. 135, 137, 236
  MAWNAN, parish of, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    court baron, barton of Penwarne, iii. 74. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, Penwarne and family 75. By Tonkin, manor of
    Trevose ibid. Advowson appendant to it, Penwarne 76. By Editor,
    Lysons’s account of the manors, Tresore, patron of living and
    incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, interesting rocks,
    Rosemullion Head 77
  Mawnoun, St. church, by Leland, iv. 269
  Maws, St. J. Tredinham, M.P. for, i. 416
  Maxentius, i. 237 _bis_
  Maximian, Emperor of Rome, iv. 100
  Maximilian, Emperor, wars against the Turks under, ii. 342, 344
  Maximus, the 2nd Emperor, ii. 37
  May, i. 78, 414.――Elizabeth and Rev. Dr. iii. 356. Rev. Mr. of St.
    Mewan 196.――Rev. Mr. of Tywardreth and St. Mewan, iv. 102
  ―――― of High cross, i. 45
  ―――― of Truro, i. 396
  Maye, Dr. iv. 74. William 187
  Mayer, Tobias, of Gottingen, ii. 222. His tables 222, 223. His widow
    allowed a premium of £3000, 223
  Maynard, i. 36――ii. 361. John 196. Sir John Sergeant 362 _bis_.――Sir
    John, iii. 5, 405, 406
  Mayne, Rev. Cuthbert, iii. 357, 360, 369, 370 _bis_. Suffered death 358
  ―――― Screffes, iii. 80; or Scriffer, ii. 284
  Mayo or Mayow, John, M.D. iii. 123 and note 250 _bis_. Memoir of
    251. His works 251, 252. Philip of Looe 250 _quat._ P. W. 250.
    Family 223, 250, 252. Monuments to 253
  Mayo of Clevyan, ii. 198
  ―――― of Truro, John, ii. 302
  Mayors of Exeter, ii. 189, 196
  Mayow, Dr. iv. 30. Mr. 74. Family 37
  ―――― of Bray, i. 354
  Mayson, Rev. Charles and Rev. Peter, rectors of Lezant, iii. 43
  Mead, Dr. iii. 85
  Mean in Sannen, seven Saxon Kings said to have met at, ii. 284
  ―――― village, iii. 433, 435. Story connected with 433
  Meath county, iii. 86
  Medhop of Trenant, i. 320 _bis_
  Median castles, ii. 423
  Mediterranean sea, iv. 168.――Regular communication with Falmouth,
    ii. 18
  Medland of Tremail in St. Petherwyn, iii. 137
  Megara in Greece, Bishop of, i. 75.――Thomas Vivian, Bishop of, iii.
    279.――Bishopric, arms of, i. 75, 94――iv. 161
  Megavissey, i. 413
  Mehinnet parish, ii. 371
  Mein Egles rocks, transport lost on, ii. 326
  Melaleuca hypericifolia, iv. 182
  Melania, St. iii. 164, 165
  Melanius, St. iii. 257
  Melgisy manor, iii. 382
  Melhuish, near Kirton, Devon, etymology, iii. 135
  ―――― Mr. ii. 97
  ―――― of Northan, Devon, family, iii. 61
  ―――― of Penryn, Jane, iii. 134. Thomas 61, 134
  Melianthus, iv. 182
  ―――― coccineus major, iv. 182
  Melianus, King or Duke of Cornwall, iii. 59, 224
  Melina, St. iii. 257, 258
  Meliorus, St. iii. 224
  Mellen, St. i. 310
  Mellin, St. parish, ii. 309
  Mellingy bridge, account of, iii. 327
  ―――― mill, iii. 326
  Mellion, i. 316.――St. parish, ii. 375, or Mellyn, iii. 161, 345,
    347, 371
  MELLION, OR MELLYN, ST. parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Newton
    manor, Mr. Coryton, one of the members imprisoned by Charles 1st,
    iii. 161. Coryton family, Crocadon 162. John Trevisa translated the
    Bible, comparison with Wickliffe’s and Tyndall’s, Westcot,
    Pentillie, or Pillaton 163. Sir James Tillie’s singular will 164. By
    Tonkin, saint, patron, Newton ibid. By Editor, Hals’s history of St.
    Melania, Coryton family 165. Vindication of Sir James Tillie 166.
    St. Mellitus, Bede’s life of him, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 167
  Mellior, St. i. 151
  Mellitus, first Bishop of London, afterwards Archbishop of
    Canterbury, iii. 167
  ―――― St. Pope Gregory’s letter to, ii. 288
  Mellyn, St. i. 409
  Menabilly, account of, iv. 101, 107
  Menadarva, i. 161 _quat._, 164
  Menage, i. 192
  Menagwins, etymology and possessors of, i. 43
  Mendicant friars, i. 83――iv. 145
  Meneage, i. 350.――Part of Kerryer hundred, ii. 358
  ―――― district, in Lizard, iii. 257, 419, 422. Described 128
  Menevia, St. David, Archbishop of, iii. 292.――Bishopric, i. 305
  Menfre, i. 2
  Menheniot manor, iii. 170
  ―――― or Menhinnet parish, iii. 13, 373
  MENHENIOT parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, iii. 167.
    Manor, jurisdiction, ancient name, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, etymology, the manor, Poole, described by
    Carew 168. Fair, Tencreek, an oven fourteen feet in diameter,
    unknown tree, Trehavock 169. Curtutholl, Trewint, Dr. Moorman
    first taught the offices of religion in English, the Latin
    service, books called in, hospital for lepers 170. By Tonkin,
    Pool, Menheniot or Tregelly manor ibid. By the Editor, size of the
    church, its tower and monuments, patron of the benefice, the
    incumbent to be of Exeter college, vicarage endowed with the great
    tithes, the incumbents, Mr. Holwell and his works 171. Cartuther,
    other places noticed by Lysons, the most fertile parish in the
    county, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, Clicker Tor 172. The
    Geology interesting. By the Editor, errica vagans, phenomena of
    flowers, no wild rose in the southern hemisphere, nor heath in
    America 173. Sir Isaac Newton’s discoveries, remarks on the system
    of nature and succession of the various species 174
  Menhynet, ii. 59
  Menhynyet, i. 409
  Mentz, Archbishopric, founded by St. Boniface, iv. 126
  Menvor, i. 168
  Menwhilly, ii. 91
  Menwinnion, ii. 241
  Meny, St. iii. 190
  Mepham, Simon, Archbishop of Canterbury, iii. 115
  Meran, St. iii. 177
  Merchant Tailor’s school, ii. 407
  Mercia, King of, i. 49.――Penda, King of, ii. 284――iii. 284
  Merewenna, i. 2
  Merina, St. iii. 177 _bis_
  Merionethshire, i. 382
  Merivale priory, i. 27
  Merlin, i. 330 _bis_, 331, 322 _bis_, 334, 339.――His prophecy, iii.
    433.――Of Arthur, i. 326, 336 _bis_
  Merran, St. parish, ii. 265
  MERRAN, ST. Merin, Meryn, or Merryn parish, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name and etymology, church, cemetery of St.
    Constantine, converted to a dwelling house, modern church, St.
    Constantine’s well, Trevose, iii. 175. Productive, but dangerous to
    shipping, Harlyn, Peter family, the parish modern 176. Saint,
    festival, his death, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, land tax, donation of Mrs. Tregoweth 177. Tonkin adds
    nothing but a notice of the saint’s name. By the Editor, no Saint
    Merina, Harlyn, Perthcothen ibid. Manor of Trevose, church,
    Catacluse stone, ornamented fonts of it here, at Padstow, and in St.
    Constantine’s church, description of St. Constantine’s, font and
    pillars handsomely carved 178. Catacluse cliffs and a pier, feast of
    Constantine, and of St. Merryn, impropriation of tithes, the three
    Mr. Gurneys, hurling, account of it in Carew, statistics, incumbent,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 179. Trevose head 180
  Merrifield, i. 134
  Merrin, or Merryn, St. church, iii. 178. The living held by the name
    of Gurney above a century 179
  ―――― parish, iii. 277
  Merryan, St. i. 404
  Merther, i. 113. Situation and possessor 44
  ―――― or Merthyr manor, i. 241 _bis_
  ―――― parish, i. 242, 417――ii. 2――iii. 207, 209, 210, 214, 354
  Merthyn, in Kerrier, iii. 133
  Merthyr church, iii. 182
  MERTHYR parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, saint,
    his well and chapel, etymology of Eglos-Merthyr, daughter to Probus,
    mode of nomination to the benefice, iii. 180. Contests respecting
    it, deed of agreement 181. Variation in value, ancient name,
    consolidation with Probus, endowment, incumbent, land tax,
    Tresawsan, James Hals 182. His history, Governor of Montserrat,
    recalled by the King, gained over to the rebels, made prisoner at
    the siege of Plymouth, and committed to Lidford castle 183. His life
    spared, comparison of Sir Richard Grenville with Richard 3rd, James
    1st, and Caligula, Hals detained at Lidford, and released by the
    arrival of Essex, Dr. Brown’s verses on Lidford castle 184. Custom
    of executing criminals before trial in Germany, Switzerland, and
    Carinthia, Hals’s family 186. Trewortha Vean and its possessors 188.
    By Tonkin, a daughter church to Probus ibid. Cornelly held with it,
    incumbent, manor of Fentongallen 189. Editor, Trevilian bridge, its
    situation, new road from Bodmin to Truro, Earl of Falmouth’s new
    road to Tregothnan, fairs, surrender of Lord Hopton’s army, church
    small, wooden tower, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 190
  Merton college, Oxford, iv. 86
  ―――― convent, i. 300
  Mervyn, St. parish, iii. 282
  Merwyn, Sir Edmund, iii. 206
  Meuthion, i. 11
  Mevagissey parish, iii. 194, 319
  MEVAGISSEY parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, name,
    saints, ancient name and its etymology, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, land tax, original name, iii. 190. Penwarne
    Trelevan 191. By Tonkin, church, tower, bells sold by the rebels
    ibid. Editor, Tonkin’s details omitted, Lysons’s additions, lately
    a poor fishing village, pier, convenient for the pilchard fishery,
    number of houses, Porthilly, manor of Trelevan and of Penwarne,
    capacity of the pool, Porthmellin cove, account of the manor and
    barton of Trelevan 192. Manors of Petuan and Penwarne 193. Barton
    of Trewincy, disposal of the tithes, a station for fishing with
    the seine nets, nature of the bay, fish tithed, vicarage house,
    glebe improved, singularities of Dr. Lyne, statistics 194.
    Incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 195
  Mevaguisey, ii. 105
  Mevassary, i. 419
  Mevennus abbey, i. 98
  Mewan, i. 41
  ―――― St. Beacon, iii. 401
  ―――― parish, i. 251, 413――iii. 190, 401, 448, 450, 455. Mr. Borlase
    rector of 54
  MEWAN, ST. parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries,
    ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax,
    Polgoth mine, iii. 195. Lefisick 196. Tonkin, patronage, incumbents,
    manor of Trewoone ibid. Editor, Hals’s various etymologies, pleasing
    appearance of the church, road from Truro to St. Austell improving
    ibid. Polgoth mine, increased working of mines, manor and village of
    Burngullo, manor of Trewoon, statistics 197. Rector, and Geology by
    Dr. Boase 198
  Mewla, i. 11
  Michael, St. Abbot of Glastonbury, iv. 26
  ―――― St. the Archangel, ii. 172, 174, 283――iii. 198, 200, 208,
    222.――Painted with wings, ii. 206. Vision of him 206, 208
  ―――― St. bells christened after, iii. 210. Churches dedicated to
    240, 398
  ―――― St. chapel at Rame Head, iii. 375
  ―――― St. Carhayes church, iii. 450
  ―――― St. Carhayes parish, i. 310, 413.――Or Carhays, iv. 117
  MICHAEL, ST. CARHAYES parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, endowment, dedication, impropriation,
    patron, incumbent, iii. 198. Value of benefice, land tax, Trevanion
    and family 199. Tonkin, name, manor of Carhayes, Trevanion family
    200. Description of the house 201. Trevanion, house and park, Porown
    Berry, Hurris, Treberrick, church, situation, description 202.
    Tower, tablet to Mr. Hooker 203. Editor, motives of the civil wars,
    part taken in those of York and Lancaster by the families of
    Edgecumbe, Trevanion and Bodrigan ibid. The two first on the winning
    side, division of Bodrigan’s property, the Trevanions unsuccessful
    on behalf of Charles, and compounded for their state, letter from
    Mr. John Trevanion to Mr. Henry Davis 204. Trevanion’s issue 205.
    Parishes of Rogate and Selburne in Sussex, Arun river and dale,
    manor of Fyning, parish church, etymology 206. Consolidated with St.
    Stephen and St. Dennis, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 207
  ―――― St. de Lammana island, iv. 26 _bis_
  ―――― St. de Loo island, iv. 238
  ―――― St. Penkivell church, Fentongollan aisle in, iii. 187
  ―――― St. Penkivell manor, iii. 189
  ―――― St. Penkivell parish, i. 140, 141, 215――ii. 356――iii. 180, 354,
    464.――School at, ii. 32
  MICHAEL, ST. PENKIVELL parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, antiquity, iii. 207. Dedication, value, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, endowment, Fentongollan aisle and chantry
    208. Fentongollan, its buildings, remembered by the writer, marble
    tomb-stone, the church a quarter cathedral 209. Bells baptized,
    form of the ceremony 210. Tonkin, hundred and situation, should
    have been named Fentongollan ibid. Fentongollan manor, its
    possessors 211. Once magnificent house now pulled down, Mopas
    Ferry, oysters spoiled by the copper ore, Treganyan, church tower,
    rectory house, Tregothnan 212. Boscawen family 213. Editor, Hals’s
    history diffuse ibid. That of Lysons substituted, Lysons, manor of
    Penkivell and of Fentongollan, hospitality of John Carminow 214.
    Tregothnan, Nancarrow ibid. Editor, Boscawen family, their origin
    215. Took the liberal side in the rebellion and revolution 216.
    Hugh Boscawen arrested Sir Richard Vyvyan, Mr. Basset and others
    on the accession of George 1st, feuds occasioned by that step,
    Boscawen ennobled, imbecility and marriage of the 2nd Lord
    Falmouth 217. Admiral Boscawen, the Nelson of his time, his
    popularity in the navy 218. His marriage and issue, memoir of Dr.
    Walcot 219. His lines on the death of W. G. Boscawen 220.
    Situation and advantages of Tregothnan, old house of great
    antiquity, beauty and convenience of the new one, old church and
    massive tower, statistics, incumbent 221. Geology by Dr. Boase 222
  Michael, St. rectory, i. 72
  ――――’s hold, iii. 298
  ――――’s, St. borough, Mr. Hussey, M.P. for, ii. 34
  ――――’s, St. chair, ii. 175 _bis_, 200, 205, 207
  ――――’s, St. chapel, ii. 201
  ――――’s, St. mount, i. 88 _bis_, 261――ii. 80, 169, 170――iii. 274,
    287, 298, 311――iv. 147, 165. By Leland 287. Its history. (_See St.
    Hilary parish_).――Cornish name for, ii. 200.――Abbot of, ii. 136,
    169, 170
  ――――’s St. Mount’s bay, iii. 81 _bis_, 82
  ――――’s St. Mount island, iv. 238
  ――――’s St. Mount monastery upon, iii. 136.――Priory of, ii. 208.
    Dissolved 191. Its property 208.――Priors of, i. 261――ii. 127, 209
    iii. 124, 128――iv. 164, 165
  ――――’s St. Mount in Normandy, ii. 176; and abbey in Periculo Maris
    208 _bis_, 210
  ――――’s St. shrine, ii. 215
  ――――’s St. well, iii. 211
  Michaelstow beacon, ii. 405
  ―――― Mary, and family, iii. 222
  ―――― parish, i. 1――ii. 401――iv. 42, 44, 93, 95
  MICHAELSTOW parish, Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient name, value of benefice, land-tax, Michaelstow family, iii.
    222. Tonkin, name, patron, incumbent ibid. Editor, Helston in Trig
    manor, Helsbury park, ruins of an ancient castle, monuments in the
    church, Treveighan village, Trevenin, advowson, present rector,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 223
  Michel manor, i. 389. Account of 392
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 262
  Michell borough, i. 391――iv. 20.――Account of 388. Members for 389.
    Compact for elections 391. Last election 391. F. Scobell, M.P. for
    410. Illustrious representatives 390.――Humphrey Courtenay, M.P. for,
    ii. 385
  ―――― Christopher, iii. 319. Paul 382. Richard 387.――John, iv. 77.
    Matthew 98 _bis_. His widow 98. Robert 55. Samuel 98. Mr. 74
  ―――― of Harlyn, Miss, iii. 176. Heiress and family 177
  ―――― foundation, Queen’s college, Oxford, ii. 139
  ―――― or Mitchell parish, ii. 280. An adjective 171
  Middle ages, ii. 215
  ―――― Amble, ii. 336
  Middleham church, iii. 114
  Middlesex county, ii. 147
  Middleton church, i. 248
  Midhope, Rev. Stephen, of St. Martin’s, near Looe, turned
    anabaptist, iii. 123
  Midhurst, Sussex, iii. 206
  Midinnia, St. iii. 442
  Midmain rock, iv. 28
  Midshipmen subjected to ten years’ service, iii. 218
  Midwinter, Robert, ii. 196
  Milbrok, by Leland, iv. 282
  Mileton of Pengersick, Miss, iv. 22
  Milford haven, ii. 182
  Militon, ii. 169. Job 193
  ―――― of Pengerwick, i. 136
  Millaton manor, iii. 44
  Millett, i. 268. John 365.――Grace, Humphrey and Mary, ii. 218. Rev.
    Mr. 282. Family monuments 219.――Rev. John Curnow and Robert Oke,
    iii. 343
  ―――― of Gurlin, St. Erth, William, ii. 224
  Millington of Pengersick in Breage, ii. 212
  Millinike, account of, ii. 67
  Millinoweth, iii. 319
  Milliton, i. 124. Story of Mr. 125. Job and William ibid. Arms ibid.
  Mills, Rev. Mr. of Veryan, iv. 122
  ―――― of Exeter, Miss, iii. 162
  Milor church, iii. 59. Churchyard, Milorus buried in 59
  ―――― parish, ii. 2, 92, 337――iii. 305. _See Mylor_
  ―――― river, iii. 231
  ――――’s, St. by Leland, iv. 271
  Milorus, a Cornish prince, iii. 59
  Milton, John, i. 310
  Miners, lines upon, ii. 131
  ―――― militia, ii. 85
  Minerva, i. 295
  Mingoose, i. 12
  Minheneth, by Leland, iv. 281
  Minors of St. Enedor, Anne and Henry, i. 211
  Minster church, iii. 111
  ―――― parish, ii. 48, 49 _quat._――iii. 22, 39, 112――iv. 66, 68
  MINSTER parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, iii. 232. Editor, ruins of a monastery,
    Tanner calls it an alien priory ibid. Dugdale’s additions, manor of
    Pollifont an appendage to the living, profits of the manor,
    situation of the church, monuments, epitaph 233. No church tower,
    legend of the bells, Botreaux castle and honour 234. Cotton and
    Phillipps family, attempt on the life of George 3rd, site of
    Botreaux castle, the great house, port of Botreaux castle,
    exportation of slate, and importation of coal and lime 235.
    Capabilities of the place for an extensive commerce, patrons of the
    living, late incumbent, manor of Worthy vale, inscribed stone
    marking the site of King Arthur’s death wound, statistics, present
    rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 236
  ―――― priory, iii. 39――iv. 105.――Prior of, ii. 49
  ―――― in Kerrier, iii. 111 _bis_.――An alien priory, iv. 101. Prior of 168
  ―――― in Tolcarne, an alien priory, iv. 101
  Minver, St. Church, i. 74.――Spire, latitude and longitude of, iii. 281
  ―――― or Minvor, St. parish, i. 367, 382――ii. 67, 332.――Rev. William
    Sandys, vicar of, iii. 10
  MINVER, ST. or St. Mynfer parish, Hals, a vicarage, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    land-tax, Trevillva barton, iii. 237. MS. here deficient. Tonkin
    only repeats part of Hals. Editor, former impropriation, value of
    benefice, manor of Bodmin bestowed on Sternhold for his version of
    the Psalms, Mr. Sandy’s 238. Travelled with Lord de Dunstanville,
    called the Cardinal, monument to Mrs. Sandys, manor of Penmear,
    Trevernon 239. Monument to Thomas Darell, Pentire point, Trevelver,
    dangerous estuary, bridge over it, two district chapels, highlands
    and lowlands, sale of the bells 240. Though inscribed Alfredus Rex,
    lines on bells, especially Great Tom of Oxford, statistics, present
    vicar and patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 241
  Miracle of transporting St. Catherine’s body, ii. 3. Of the
    thundering legion 76
  Misall Romanorum, i. 393
  Mitchel of Hengar, i. 131
  Mitchell borough, i. 61――iii. 81, 322, 324. Description of 268.
    Constitution 271
  ―――― Robert, ii. 96. Rev. Mr. 299, 302, 315.――Rev. Mr. of Maker,
    iii. 101. Rev. Mr. of Merthyr 190. Rev. Mr. of St. Mewan
    195.――James, John, and Thomas, brothers, iv. 73. Captain 94
  ―――― of Truro, i. 398 _bis_
  ―――― Humphrey Borlase, Lord, iii. 268
  ―――― Morton manor, ii. 416
  Mithian manor, i. 7――ii. 192. Free chapel in 12
  Moddern, ii. 286
  Moderet, John, i. 283
  Modeton, iii. 438
  Modford in Launceston, iii. 136
  Modishole manor, iii. 269
  Mogul’s country, ii. 227
  Mogun bridge, by Leland, and trajectus, iv. 269
  Mogun’s, St. church, iii. 332
  ―――― creek, iii. 332
  Mohammed, the Sultan, interfered in the contest of the Paleolagi,
    took Constantinople, &c. ii. 367. Puts an envoy in irons 368
  Mohun, i. 63, 302. John 65, 255. Reginald 65, 255, 301, 356 Sir
    Reginald 7, 65 _bis_, 345, 346 _quat._ 356. Sibella 8. William 7,
    301. Arms 351, 356. Pedigree from the Conquest 66.――John de, ii.
    409 _bis_. Sir John 410. Sir John or Sir Reginald, story of 402.
    Reginald 56, 409 _bis_. Sir Reginald 410. Family 409, 410 _bis_,
    412. Monuments 411.――Reginald de, iii. 293, 303. Family 303.――Sir
    William, iv. 15. Family 44. Arms 96.――Lord, i. 65――ii. 410――iii.
    315――iv. 14, 186.――Charles Lord, i. 65. His duel with the Duke of
    Hamilton 66 and 67. His character 67. Wife drowned ibid.――John,
    Lord 65, 255.――John, Lord, of Dunster castle, Somersetshire, ii.
    409 _bis_.――Warwick, Lord, i. 65――ii. 410
  Mohun of Hall, Sir William, ii. 56
  ―――― of Lithony, i. 420. Warwick, ib.
  ―――― of Tencreek, i. 255. Warwick, William, and arms 255
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 356 _bis_
  Mola, ancient chapel at, i. 12
  Molesworth, i. 61 _bis_, 74, 266 _bis_, 397. Hon. John 368. Sir John
    399. Sir William 117. Rev. William 117, 406.――Rev. H. ii. 364. Sir
    John 273. Sir W. 88. Family 151, 273, 356, 357.――Hender, iii. 214.
    John 234. Sir William 335. Family 334.――Sir John, iv. 64. Rev. W. of
    St. Winnow 159 _bis_. Family 44, 65, 127
  ―――― of Molesworth, Sir Walter, a crusader, i. 369, 375
  ―――― of Pencarrow, i. 416. Hender 370 _bis_. Sir Hender 370 _bis_,
    375. John 370 _ter._, 375, 397. Sir John 116, 370, 374, 375. Arms
    370.――Family, ii. 274, 334――iii. 170――iv. 163
  ―――― of Pendavy, Sir William, i. 377
  ―――― of Tretane, John, i. 369, 370
  Molton, ii. 76
  Mona, i. 194
  Monasticon Anglicanum, i. 168――ii. 62, 176――iii. 103, 111――iv. 6,
    100, 156
  Monck, Mr. of Devon, ii. 251.――General, his conduct characterized,
    iii. 460
  ―――― of Potheridge, Devon, Humphrey, ii. 251
  ―――― frigate, iii. 186
  Monckton, Henry de, i. 383.――Family, ii. 354
  ―――― Arundell, Robert, Viscount Galway, ii. 354
  Monheere, George, iii. 387
  Monk, General, i. 116――ii. 26――iv. 75 _bis_.――His refusal to give or
    take quarter, and victory over the Dutch, entertained by Capt.
    Penrose, ii. 26. Again defeats the Dutch 27. Sir John Grenville, the
    bearer of the King’s letters to 345. Rev. Nicholas, brother of the
    general 345.――Family, i. 36, 302――ii. 5
  ―――― frigate, ii. 28. Discharged unpaid 29
  Monks of St Benedict, i. 73; or Benedictine, ii. 208
  Monmouth, Jeffery of, Bishop of St. Asaph, i. 342
  ―――― Duke of, his invasion, iii. 160
  Monotholites, ii. 125
  Monpesson, Sir Giles, i. 223
  Montacute, William, Earl of Salisbury, i. 339.――Earl, ii. 91.
    Marquis 182
  ―――― priory in Somersetshire, iii. 261 _bis_――iv. 112 _ter._, 113
    _bis_, 122. Monks of 112
  Montagu, Lady Anne and Edward, Earl of Sandwich, iii. 104
  Montague, M. A. Browne, of Cowdray castle, Sussex, Lord, iii. 231
  Montgomery, Arnold de, i. 34.――Roger de, Earl of Arundell, iii. 142
  ―――― iv. 8
  Monton, David de, i. 246
  Montpelier, iii. 400
  Montreuil, ii. 127. In France, siege of 196
  Moone, Thomas, iii. 346
  Moor, Mr. i. 254
  Moore, Sir Thomas, ii. 53
  Moorman, Dr. John, Vicar of Menheniot, iii. 170
  Moorwinstow parish, iv. 16
  Mopas passage, iii. 212
  Moran, St. iv. 277
  Morden, by Leland, iv. 270
  Mordred, cousin of King Arthur, i. 337, 372.――His battle with
    Arthur, ii. 402. Mortally wounded 403
  Morea, ii. 366 _bis_, 367. Attacked by the Turks 367. Despots of 367
    _bis_
  Morehead family, property sold, iii. 20
  Moreland in Lesnewith, iii. 133
  Moreps, ii. 121
  Moreri, i. 111.――His Dictionnaire Historique, ii. 207――iv. 157
  Mores manor, i. 202, 203, 204
  Moresk manor, iii. 354
  MOREWINSTOW parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name
    and saint, a vicarage, value of benefice, patron, impropriation,
    iii. 254. Editor, later value and impropriation, present
    impropriation, rise of the river Tamar, west part rugged, situation
    and size of church ibid. Monuments, villages, Stanbury manor, error
    of Lysons, Stanbury, Bishop of Hereford, Tonacombe Lea farm 255.
    Cleave house, Chapel house, statistics, late vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Dunstone rocks, cliffs of Stanbury creek 256
  Morgan, Rev. W. A. of Lewannick, iii. 38.――Of Tresmere, iv. 65
  Morice, Barbara and Sir William, i. 116.――Family, ii. 256. Sir
    Nicholas 175. Sir William, family and property 334
  ―――― of Werrington, Catherine, i. 265, 266. Sir Nicholas and Sir
    William 265.――Family, iii. 178.――Edward, iv. 94
  ―――― St. Oratory of, ii. 75
  Morike church, iii. 190
  Moris manor, i. 396――ii. 2.――Duchy manor, iv. 72
  Morisk castle, iv. 228
  Morrice, i. 74
  Morris, Sir William and his family, iii. 460. Rev. Mr. 97. Mr.
    executed 184
  ―――― town, i. 266
  Morrison, Rev. F. H. ii. 416
  Morsa parish, ii. 282
  Morshead, Rev. Edward, i. 159.――William, ii. 154. Mr. 87. Family,
    iii. 172――iv. 60
  ―――― of Cartuther, Sir John, i. 321
  Mortaigne or Morton, Earl of, ii. 208, 358, 399. His market 70.
    Robert 175, 176, 202, 203 _bis_, 211, 235, 238, 379, 384, 422. His
    charter to St. Michael’s mount 210. William, Earl of, said to have
    built Lanceston castle, and to have drawn the inhabitants from
    Dunhevet to that town 418
  Mortayne, iii. 438
  Morth, John and William, iv. 22
  Mortimer, Eleanor, i. 64. Roger 339. Roger, Earl of March and Ulster 64
  Morton, iii. 14, 65――iv. 22
  ―――― Earl of, i. 134――iii. 261, 264, 276. John 296. Robert 112, 203
    _bis_, 418, 419. William 203 _ter._――Robert, iii. 14, 27, 44, 46,
    117, 291, 346, 349, 352, 451 _bis_. Robert Guelam 462.――Robert, iv.
    15, 67. William 110, 122.――Matilda, Countess of, ii. 211
  ―――― Earl of Cornwall and, iii. 22
  ―――― and Cornwall, Earl of, William, ii. 175.――Robert, iv. 102, 118,
    153. William 100
  ―――― Thomas, mayor of Launceston, ii. 423.――John, iv. 2, 3. Family
    and arms 3
  ―――― honor, iv. 96, 112
  ―――― manor, ii. 235――iv. 68
  ―――― prior of, ii. 49
  Morun, St. unknown, ii. 356
  Morva or Morvah, parish, iii. 82, 89, 425 _bis_――iv. 164
  MORVA parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, daughter to
    Madderne, etymology, Tregamynyon, iii. 242. The Golden Lanyon, his
    improvement in roofing houses, Carvolghe manor 243. Editor, church
    re-built, its situation, patron, curious entrenchment 243.
    Described, called Castle Chiowne, destroyed by depredations, a
    Cromleigh, Carn Galva, statistics 244. Geology by Dr. Boase 245
  Morval manor, iii. 246, 248, 361. House 249
  ―――― parish, iii. 427, 463. By Looe 118
  MORVAL parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, ancient
    name, a vicarage, value, etymology, iii. 245. Editor, Tonkin’s
    etymology mistaken, Sir Hugh de Morville one of Becket’s
    murderers, state of Cornwall during the wars of the roses, murder
    and robbery of John Glynn 246. His widow’s petition to parliament,
    schedule of property stolen 247. Buller family 248. Morval manor
    house, improved 249. Bray, epitaph on Philip Mayow, Dr. John Mayow
    250. Dr. Beddoes, Sir Humphrey Davy introduced to him by the
    Editor, Wood’s memoir of Dr. Mayow 251. His works, Polgover,
    Lydcott, Wringworthy, Sand Place village, situation of church,
    monuments 252. Impropriation of tithes, patron, incumbent, Bindon
    hill, prospect from it, road passes nearly over its summit,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 253
  Morval town, iii. 247
  Morvall, i. 316――ii. 59
  Morville, Sir Hugh de, iii. 246
  Morwell, by Leland, iv. 282
  Morwen, St. iii. 116, 254
  Morwenna, i. 2
  Morwinstow, ii. 340
  Morysk castle, iv. 229
  Moses, ii. 65
  Motiled, ii. 427
  Moune, William, i. 65 _bis_
  Mount of the tomb, ii. 208
  Mount or Mount’s bay, i. 227――ii. 118, 120, 169, 174, 176, 182, 207.
    Trees found in 173――iii. 46, 48, 78, 83, 97, 98, 215, 283, 375. _See
    St. Michael’s, Mount’s Bay_
  ―――― Calvary, a Cornish poem, i. 109――ii. 99 _bis_, 152. Extract
    from 99; and Keigwyn’s translation of, iii. 288. Both published by
    Editor 329
  ―――― Charles, i. 368
  ―――― Edgecumbe, iii. 108, 110. Account of 107. Partly in Devon 104.
    Described by Carew ibid. Possessors of 101. House built 103. The
    only seat in Cornwall superior to Tregothnan 221
  ―――― Edgecumbe, cliff at, iii. 380
  ―――― Edgecumbe, Countess of, ii. 364.――Earl of, iii. 29, 195,
    379――iv. 92.――Lord, i. 154――ii. 100, 393
  ―――― Seyntaubyn, i. 262
  ―――― Sinai, monastery upon, ii. 37
  ―――― Stephens, John, his life and tragical death, and speculations
    upon the latter, i. 84
  ―――― Toby, i. 158
  Mountague hill, Somersetshire, ii. 283
  Mounts, i. 84
  Mountserat island, iii. 183
  Mourton, James, ii. 193
  Mousehole manor, iii. 91
  ―――― village, iii. 286, 288, 290, 291. Account of 286. Destroyed by
    the Spaniards 91
  Moushole, ii. 174
  Mowne, William, i. 66 _bis_. Reginald, Lord Dunster 66. William,
    Lord Dunster 66. William, Earl of Somerset 66 _bis_
  Mowpass passage, iii. 464
  Mowsehole, by Leland, iv. 286
  Moyes, J. R. ii. 160 _bis_
  Moyle, i. 44, 45, 74. Ann and David 260. Nathaniel 371.――Family, ii.
    67. Thomas 67. Miss 77, 255. Mr. 77 _quin._, 78, 350
  Moyle of Bake, i. 222. Sir Walter 375.――Walter, ii. 76, 77. His
    works 76.――Sir Walter and his daughter, iii. 2
  ―――― of Beke, John, Sir Walter, and arms, ii. 67
  ―――― of Bodmin, ii. 67
  ―――― of Boke, Elizabeth and Sir Walter, i. 243, 244
  ―――― of Moyle, ii. 67
  ―――― of Oxford, ii. 67
  ―――― of Pendavy, i. 375. Nathaniel ibid.
  ――――of Trefurans, ii. 67
  Moyn, Reginald, Earl of Somerset, i. 66
  Mudgan, iii. 126. Account of 125
  Mudge, Colonel, iv. 31
  Mullion cove, iii. 259
  ―――― parish, i. 301; or Mullyan, ii. 116, 126――iii. 128, 416, 419,
    424. In Kerrier 164
  MULLION parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name,
    dedication, a vicarage, patron, incumbent, impropriation, endowment,
    value, the saint, iii. 257. Editor, church ancient, painted glass
    ibid. Monument and epitaph to Mr. Favell, tower, tithes, manor of
    Pradannock, divided into higher and lower, Clahar manor, parish
    feast, St. Malo’s day, late vicar, statistics 258. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Kinance cove, Mullion cove, Bolerium cove. Editor, beauty of
    Kinance cove, description of it and of the Cornish rocks generally
    259. Erica vagans and asparagus officinalis 260
  Mundy, i. 232 _ter._ John, _bis_, Sir John and arms 232
  ―――― of Rialton, Anne and John, iii. 186
  Mundye, Anthony, ii. 10
  Murray, Mr. of Albemarle-street, iii. 251
  Murth, Jeffrey and John, iv. 25. Mr. 24. Family ibid. Arms 25
  Musgrave, Dr. W. letters to, ii. 76
  Musical air, ancient, found in Scotland, Ireland, and Cornwall,
    supposed to be British, ii. 166
  Muttenham, etymology and resident, i. 104
  Mydhop of Essex, Henry, Roger and arms, i. 320
  Mylbrooke, iv. 291
  Mylor manor, iii. 228 _bis_
  ―――― parish, ii. 11
  MYLOR parish, Hals lost, situation, boundaries, saint, value of
    benefice, a vicarage, patron, incumbent, impropriation, Carclew
    barton and its possessors, iii. 224. House built by Mr. Kempe, tin
    225; and antimony, Restronget manor, and passage with a ferry boat,
    part of Penryn manor, Trefusis and Tregoze manors 226. Trefusis
    family, house, &c. Nankersy, its etymology, town of Flushing, the
    Dutch would have made it commercial, Mr. Trefusis improved it at
    great expense 227. Better situated for packets than Falmouth, Mylor
    manor, situation and description of the church 228. Editor, error in
    the valuation, monuments in the church 228. Westmacott’s to Reginald
    Cocks, Carclew, the Lemon family, Polvellan described 229. Colonel
    Lemon a proficient in music, Sir William improved Carclew, Sir
    Charles’s further improvements, erica ciliaris, Trefusis family 230.
    Situation of Trefusis, Flushing an elegant town. Tonkin’s etymology
    of Restrongel, present vicar, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 231
  ―――― pool, iii. 224, 228
  Mynor, Anne and Henry, i. 222
  Mynors of St. Enedor, Anne and Henry, iii. 135
  ―――― of Treago, i. 248. Anne 249
  Myra, in Lysia, St. Nicholas, Archbishop of, iv. 172

  Naal or Natal Abbot, iii. 432
  Naboth’s vineyard, i. 329
  Nacothan, John, iii. 387
  Nampara, iii. 326, 327
  Nampetha, iii. 319
  Nancar, account of, i. 256
  Nancarrow estate, i. 19――iii. 215
  ―――― family, i. 20
  Nance in Illogan, iv. 129
  ―――― i. 298.――Family and arms, ii. 239.――John, iv. 129, 130. Arms 129
  ―――― of Chester family, iii. 382
  ―――― of Nance, ii. 337
  ―――― Mellin, iii. 326
  Nanceolvern, possessors of, iii. 88
  Nanfan of Trethewoll, John, Richard and arms, i. 408
  Nanfon, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Nankersy, tenement, account of, iii. 227. A Dutch town on it ibid.
  Nankivell, Rev. Edw. of St. Agnes and Stithians, iv. 5
  Nanquitty, ii. 57
  Nansant church, ii. 256
  Nansanton, Nassington or Naffeton, iii. 334, 335
  Nansaugh barton, account of, ii. 354
  Nansavallan, account of, by the Editor, ii. 305. By Hals 299. By
    Tonkin 303
  ―――― farm, improvement of, ii. 306
  Nanskevall or Typpel, of St. Colomb, Matthew, Richard and arms, iv. 139
  Nansloe, account of, ii. 139
  Nansoath manor, account of, ii. 353
  Nansperian, i. 349 _ter._ Arms 349
  Nanswhiddon, account of, i. 223
  Nanswidden in St. Colomb, ii. 143
  Nantellan, i. 257
  Nants, ii. 236. Account of 238
  Nantval, i. 413
  Napleton, Rev. John, ii. 33
  Napoleon’s use of the Pitt diamond, i. 69
  Narbonne, general chapter of, i. 81
  Nare, the, i. 330
  ―――― point, i. 330
  Nash, the architect, iii. 205
  Nation, Rev. Mr. ii. 332
  Natural history, the learned Dr. Lombard ignorant of, ii. 408
  Naunton’s, St. chapel and well, i. 257
  Nautical Almanack, description of, conducted by Dr. Maskelyne, since
    improved, ii. 233
  Nava family, ii. 80
  Naval affairs after the seven years war, ii. 246
  ―――― power, iii. 154
  Navarre, Blanche, Queen of, iii. 19
  Naw Voz or Naw Whoors, i. 220
  Nectan, i. 2――iv. 156
  ―――― St. or Nighton, iv. 155. His history 155
  ―――― chapel, iv. 157
  Nelson, Admiral Boscawen compared with, iii. 218
  Neocæsarea, i. 388
  Neot, St. iii. 261, 262.――His body stolen, i. 99.――His life, ii.
    396――iii. 262. A relation of Alfred, Alfred visited him, was
    advised by him in founding the university of Oxford, his
    remains 263
  Neot’s, St. church, iii. 20. Its windows 363.――Curious painting in,
    ii. 298
  ―――― manor, iii. 260, 261
  ―――― parish, i. 174, 178――ii. 395――iii. 111, 347――iv. 48, 128,
    129.――Alfred’s visit to, iii. 241
  NEOT’S, ST. parish, Hals’s, MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, a vicarage, value, patrons, incumbent, iii. 260.
    Manor of St. Neot 261. By Editor, error in Tonkin’s valuation,
    Lysons on the manors of this parish, manor and advowson united ibid.
    Mr. Grylls restored the church, its situation, St. Guerir, performed
    a miraculous cure on Alfred, St. Neot related to Alfred, his
    singular penance and miraculous powers, Alfred frequently visited
    him, his death 262. Appeared after death to Alfred, led his armies,
    and advised him to found Oxford university, his relics stolen, the
    monastery suppressed after the Conquest, his memory cherished,
    diminutive stature, painted glass preserved for his sake,
    description of the church 263. Windows, voluntary contributions,
    preserved through the Reformation and Civil War, since falling into
    decay till restored by Mr. Grylls, “Hedgeland’s Description, &c.”
    264. Dozmere, marvellous tales relating to it, story of Mr. Tregagle
    condemned to empty it with a limpet shell having a hole bored in it,
    his roaring 265. Etymology of Dozmere, statistics, incumbent,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 266
  ――――’s, St. an alien priory, iv. 101
  Neotston or Neot’s place, iii. 261
  Nero, the Roman emperor, i. 329――iv. 101
  Nesta, Princess of Wales, i. 34
  Nettlebed manor, iv. 4, 5 _bis_
  Nettlecombe, Somersetshire, iv. 114
  Neustria pillaged by the Normans, ii. 90
  Neville, Richard, Earl of Salisbury, and Margaret his daughter, ii.
    182. Richard Earl of Warwick 38. His cognizance on Fowey church 38.
    Grants the Foy men commissions for privateering 40. His commission
    to punish the Foy pirates 41
  Nevres, St. Dye, Bishop of, ii. 133
  New bridge, i. 138
  ―――― Cambridge, iii. 72
  ―――― Holland, captain Bligh, governor of, iv. 45
  ―――― York, ii. 268
  Newcastle, ii. 28
  ―――― Hollis, Duke of, iii. 147
  Newcome, i. 160
  Newcomen, Mr. of Dartmouth, ii. 83
  Newenham, Devon, Cistercian abbey at, iii. 293
  Newham abbey, Devon, its dissolution, iv. 15
  Newhaven, Charles Cheney, viscount, iii. 458
  Newlan, Newlin or Newlyn parish, ii. 174, 270――iii. 81, 97, 99, 112,
    313, 317, 324, 333, 358――iv. 20.――Vicarage, i. 130
  Newland parish, i. 230, 245, 386, 393
  NEWLIN, or ST. NEWLIN parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, saint, a vicarage, value, patron, tithe
    appropriation, incumbent, manor of Cargol, ruins and prison there,
    Treludra, iii. 267. Humphrey Borlase adhered to King James 2nd,
    Treludra or Borlase Pippin, borough of Mitchell, described by
    Browne Willis, manor 268. Degembris, Palmaunter, Tresilian,
    Treworthen manors 269. Trerice manor 270. By Editor, valuation,
    impropriation, situation and description of church, carved work,
    Arundell vault ibid. Monument to Mr. Pooley, incumbent Mr.
    Polwhele, manor of Cargols, and Treludra, borough of Michell, its
    constitution 271. Remarks upon it, close boroughs in general and
    the Reform Act, Shepherds, Sir C. Hawkins’s lead and silver mine
    272. Mr. John Giddy a memoir of him, his death, quotation from
    Juvenal 273. Manor of Newlyn, story of Sir John Arundell, John for
    the King and his son the first lord of Trerice, the house at
    Trerice, Tresilian improved, statistics 274. Present vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, Trevemper bridge, Black Lime rock, the town
    a village in the parish of Paul 275
  Newlin, by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Newlyn, James de, iii. 287
  ―――― manor, iii. 274
  ―――― town, iii. 275, 286. Account of 288, 289
  Newnham manor, ii. 318
  Newport borough, ii. 420, 432.――Its history and small extent, iii.
    458. Bought by the Duke of Northumberland 460. Charles Cheyney, M.P.
    for 458
  ―――― town, iii. 461――iv. 51
  Newquay, i. 236. Account of 234, 235
  Newton, Sir Isaac, iii. 174.――His theory of gravitation, &c. ii. 222
  ―――― account of, iii. 161
  ―――― Ferrers, West, iii. 164. Its possessors 165
  Nicene Creed, i. 252
  Nicholas, Mrs. of Looe, i. 286
  ―――― Pope, ii. 354, 356, 365, 384, 394, 398, 411, 412, 414――His
    taxatio Beneficiorum, iii. 5, 7, 41, 44, 46, 56, 106 _bis_, 172,
    228, 232, 238, 257, 261, 270, 276, 278, 291, 400, 453 _bis_――iv. 113
  ―――― 2nd, Pope, i. 110
  ―――― 4th, ―――― iv. 152
  ―――― 5th, ―――― iv. 148
  ―――― St. supposed by Tonkin to be the patron saint of Kellington
    parish, ii. 311. A popular saint, held in high veneration in Russia,
    his history, kept the Roman fasts when an infant 312. His festival
    celebrated by the boy bishop 313.――The patron of infants, iv. 172.
    Of mariners 171. His history 172
  ―――― St. church, Bodmin, belonging to Franciscan friars, great
    dimensions, converted into a house of correction and market place,
    i. 79, and court-house 80. Its font 80. Revenues 83
  ―――― island, iii. 101――iv. 238
  ―――― St. in Scilly, priory and prior, iv. 171
  ―――― Shambles, London, i. 83
  Nicholl of Penrose, Anthony, ii. 384
  Nicholls, i. 74, 305 _bis_――ii. 130.――Frank, M. D. iii. 84. Walter
    16. William 85 _bis_. Mrs. 85. Family 83, 84, 90
  ―――― of Penrose, ii. 153
  ―――― of Trewane, ii. 338. John 335, 339 _quat._ Arms 339
  Nichols, J. and Son, Parliament-street, ii. 295, 296――iii. 45, 120,
    264――iv. 25
  ―――― i. 109, 178, 221.――Family, iii. 243, 343
  ―――― of Trewane, i. 173, 416
  Nicholson, Margaret, i. 134――iv. 45
  Nicolas, Sir Harris, iii. 138
  Nicoll, Anthony, iv. 96. Humphrey 97
  Nietstone, iv. 48
  Nightingale, i. 144
  Nikenor, by Leland, iv. 265
  Nile, battle of, iii. 160
  Nine maids, i. 221. Account of 220.――In Gwendron, ii. 137
  Ninnis, ii. 218
  Niveton, i. 174
  “Noble ingratitude,” iv. 98
  Noles, Mrs. Elizabeth, ii. 84
  Norden, J. i. 341, 350――ii. 336, 414, 417――iii. 75, 360, 361――iv. 41
  Norfolk, iii. 248
  ―――― Thomas Howard, Duke of, iii. 293
  Norman Conquest, ii. 62, 80, 92, 94, 106, 126, 129, 151, 155, 165,
    258, 291, 299, 319, 335, 381――iii. 33, 56, 59, 74, 78, 114, 118, 130
    _bis_, 151, 168, 175, 207, 208, 209, 222, 264, 363, 391, 393, 402,
    403, 419, 425, 428, 436, 456――iv. 66, 71 _bis_, 99, 100, 140, 160, 164
  ―――― French, life of Guy Earl of Warwick in, iii. 113
  ―――― magnificence, ii. 423
  Normandy, i. 335 _quat._, 336――ii. 179 _bis_, 202――iv. 103, 144
  ―――― Duke of, iii. 130. Robert and William 462.――Rolle, ii. 344, 347
  Normans, i. 256――iv. 99
  ―――― petition for and obtain letters of marque against Fowey and
    burn it, ii. 39. Pillage Neustria 90. Their castles, the keeps
    spacious 423
  North, Lord, ii. 245. Lord Keeper 255 _bis_. Mr. Tregenna married
    his relation 255
  ―――― hill parish, ii. 230――iii. 37, 43
  Northampton, John, i. 341
  Northcott, i. 108, 111
  Northill, i. 21, 409
  Northmore of Oakhampton, Devon, Mr. iii. 41
  Northumberland, i. 289, 290 _ter._――iv. 42
  ―――― Hugh 1st Duke of, iii. 460 _bis_. Josceline Percy, Earl of 460
  ―――― Ethelfred, King of, ii. 284
  Norton manor, iv. 15
  Norton Rolle manor, ii. 416, 427
  Noseworthy, Edward, ii. 260――iii. 5, 238. William 83.――Francis, iv. 77
  Nosworthy, Edward, i. 36 _bis_. John 36.――Edward, ii. 51, 55 _ter._
    His lawsuit 51. Family 55 _bis_
  ―――― of Truro, Jane, i. 243
  Notitia Monastica, i. 200
  ―――― Parliamentaria, i. 200
  Nottingham, ii. 76
  ―――― castle, ii. 179
  Nowell, Mr. made a fortune at Falmouth, ii. 19.――Michael, of
    Falmouth, iii. 77
  Noy, i. 143 _bis_. Edward 147. Hesther and Humphrey 144. William 144
    _quat._ Attorney-general 147
  Noye, William, Attorney-general, ii. 66, 160. Bought the estate of
    Lanew, Colonel Humphrey his son dispossessed after an expensive
    litigation by the Earl of Bath 333. Sold his title to Davies 334.
    The Editor their descendant and heir at law 339
  ―――― of Pendrea, in Burian, Bridgman, iii. 145, 159, 160. Catherine
    152 _bis_, 159. Edward 145 _bis_, 152 _bis_, 153, 156. His duel 152,
    156. Humphrey 145. Colonel Humphrey 145, 152 _bis_, 153 _quat._,
    156, 159 _bis_, 160. His marriage contract 157. His monument 151.
    Katherine 145. William 145. William, Attorney-general 143, 145, 151,
    152, 161, 342. Memoir of him 143. L’Estrange’s character of him, his
    death, and descendants, entertaining Charles 1st 145. Upheld the
    extreme prerogative 146. Received the thanks of his college, having
    pleaded its cause gratis, with the report from the college register
    155. His picture, a copy presented by the Editor to Exeter college
    156. Anagram on his name 146. His will 152. His works 153. Catalogue
    of them 154. His MSS. in the British Museum 154. His “Reports”, 145,
    154. Family 216.――Arms, i. 361――iii. 145, 151. Crest and motto
    151.――Hester, widow of Humphrey, her petition, iv. 57. Colonel
    Humphrey served Charles 1st 58. William, Attorney-general 57 _bis_,
    58. Family 57
  Nugent, iii. 192.――George Lord, his life of Hampden, ii. 77. His
    account of the quarrel of Eliot and Moyle 78. His memorials of
    Hampden 349.――Lord 349
  Nunn, St. mother of St. David, iii. 292
  Nunn’s, St. pool, method of cure, i. 21
  Nunne, St., day dedicated to, i. 25
  Nuns, Benedictine, i. 73
  Nutcell, St. Boniface, Abbot of, iv. 128
  Nutcombe, Rev. Nutcombe, Chancellor of Exeter, iii. 4
  Nutwell, i. 168, 169
  Nympha bank, iii. 6

  Oak bark, decoction of, preserves fishing nets, ii. 264
  Oakeston, Sir Alexander, ii. 8, 109――iii. 448.――Joan, his widow, ii. 109
  Oakhampton, i. 170. Borough 65
  Oakstone, Sir Alexander, i. 36
  Oate of Peransabulo, i. 348
  Oats, John, iii. 318 _bis_. Thomas 318 _quat._ Mr. and origin of
    name 318
  Observatory, Royal, Mr. Hitchins and his son assistants at, ii. 222, 224
  Ocrinum, ii. 94, 199. Of Ptolemy 174. Promontory supposed to be the
    Lizard 20
  Octa, i. 326
  Octanett family, ii. 341
  Odin, i. 341
  Odo, Mr. ii. 426
  Œdipus Tyrannus, ii. 103
  Ogbere or Ugbere tenement, iv. 41
  Okeford, Devon, Mr. Haden, incumbent of, iii. 19. Rev. James Parkin,
    rector 96
  Oklynton Brygge, iv. 255
  Olea fragrans, iv. 183
  Oliver, Thomas, ii. 189.――Dr. iii. 88. Mr. of Falmouth 159.――Rev.
    Mr. of Zennar, iv. 164
  “Oliver’s Historic Collections,” iii. 372
  Oncomb, Rutland, ii. 89
  Opie, i. 368.――The artist, iii. 88
  ―――― of Ennis, i. 399 _bis_. John and Robert ibid.
  ―――― of Towton, i. 399. Arms ibid.
  Oppie, Thomas, iii. 387
  Orange, Prince of, ii. 112――iii. 216, 297
  Orcett, ii. 340
  Orchard, Charles, iii. 349. Family 415, 416. Paul 413, 414, 416
  ―――― of Alderscombe, ii. 347. Memorials in church 347
  ―――― of Hartland Abbey, Paul, ii. 347
  ―――― of Orcott family, and Charles, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 343
  ―――― Mauvais, East, manor, iv. 136
  Orcot, account of, ii. 343
  Ordgar, Duke of Devon, iv. 6.――Earl of Devonshire, iii. 384, 460
  Ordnance, Mr. Call’s improvements in, iv. 11
  Ordulf, Earl of Devonshire, iii. 385
  Orestes, iii. 265
  Orford, George Walpole, Earl of, iii. 230 _bis_
  Origen, i. 193, 388
  Orleans, Duke of, Regent of France, purchases the Pitt Diamond, i.
    68. Wears it in his hat 69
  Ornithologum longibracteatum, iv. 182
  Orosius, ii. 237
  Osbaldeston, Miss, ii. 34
  Osbert, i. 383.――Mr. iv. 44, 46
  Osborne family, iv. 173
  Osca, a town in Spain, i. 88
  Oseney Abbey, iii. 241
  Osmunda Regalis, iv. 181
  Osraig clan, iii. 331
  Osseney North, near Oxford, iv. 5
  Ossian, ii. 405. His poems 406
  Ossory, Bishop and Archdeacon of, iv. 146 _bis_
  ―――― county, ii. 94――iii. 331
  Ossuna, Don Diego, Bishop of, i. 311
  Oswald, St. iii. 33
  Otaheite, discovery of, i. 359――iii. 405
  Otham or Othram manor, iii. 276
  Other half stone, i. 178 _bis_, 180, 182 _bis_, 183
  Othonna pectinata, iv. 182
  Otterham parish, ii. 86 _bis_, 232, 273 _bis_――iii. 22――iv. 61, 125, 127
  OTTERHAM parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, iii. 275.
    Value, ancient name, a rectory, patron and incumbent 276. Editor,
    manor, church, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase ibid.
  Ottery St. Mary, i. 394
  Ottomans destroyed the wall of Constantinople, ii. 366
  Oughtred, Sir Anthony, defeats the French fleet, ii. 171
  Ovid, passage from, i. 189.――Notes on, iv. 87
  Owen, G. W., iv. 60, 276
  Oxalis, iv. 182
  Oxenham of Oxenham in Devon, iv. 25
  Oxford, i. 84, 247――ii. 60, 65, 138, 139, 221, 241, 389――iii. 52,
    160, 329――iv. 14.――Bath stone brought to, i. 58.――Arms of, and
    tradition connected with them, ii. 404
  ―――― near Sevenoaks, iv. 87
  ―――― county, iii. 156
  ―――― Earl of, John de Vere, i. 262, 402. Richard de Vere 262,
    263.――Aubrey last of the De Veres, ii. 395. John 12th Earl 181
    _bis_. John 13th Earl 182, 183 _bis_, 184. John 14th Earl 185.
    Richard 11th Earl 181. Richard 395.――Richard de Vere 11th Earl, iii. 65
  ―――― press, iii. 123.――Delegates from, ii. 266
  ―――― University, ii. 147, 233, 266――iii. 72, 155, 163, 221, 239, 300
    _bis_, 336 _bis_, 344, 352――iv. 69, 144, 145.――Founded, iii.
    264.――J.P. Rigaud, Professor of Astronomy at, ii. 376
  ―――― verses, ii. 348
  Oxnam, Richard, iii. 89
  Oysters poisoned by the copper, iii. 212

  Pabenham, John de, i. 370
  Pacific Ocean, coral reefs in, iii. 108
  Padestock, iii. 324
  Paddistow, by Leland, iv. 284
  Padestow, by Leland, iv. 260
  Padstow church, i. 74.――Font in, iii. 178
  ―――― harbour, ii. 253――iii. 236, 382, 423
  ―――― haven, i. 372, 373 _bis_, 376 _bis_, 381
  ―――― parish, i. 377――ii. 79, 256 _bis_, 299――iii. 175, 334 _bis_,
    435.――Rev. William Rawlings, rector, ii. 400.――Etymology, iii. 176
  PADSTOW parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, Leland’s
    account of the town, privileges derived from Athelstan, ancient
    names, value of benefice, St. Petroc born there, Fuller and
    Collier upon St. Petroc, church a vicarage, value, iii. 277.
    Patron, incumbent 278. Editor, named from St. Petroc, value of
    benefice, Whitaker’s conjecture that Mr. Prideaux lived on the
    site of St. Petroc’s monastery, character of him ibid. Carew’s
    account of the house, its erection and improvements, church 279.
    Prideaux monuments, town not large, harbour inconvenient,
    prospects of its improvement, Mr. William Rawlins brought a
    considerable trade, tithes split, several chapels, St. Sampson’s
    280. Account of St. Sampson, a beautiful walk, St. Saviour’s
    chapel, origin of that name, domestic tragedy contained in a black
    letter pamphlet, trigonometrical survey, Stepper point 281. Time
    of high water, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, slate at
    Dinah’s Cave and Rock Ferry 282. Singular crystalline rock,
    Penniscen bay, Yealm bridge in Werrington 283
  ―――― rock, i. 74, 94
  ―――― town, iii. 331
  Pagan army employed by the Christian Emperor of Rome, ii. 75
  ―――― inhabitants of Cornwall converted, iii. 304
  Pagans, iii. 285
  Page, i. 263
  Paget, Rev. Mr. of St. Mewan, iii. 196.――Rev. Simon of Truro, iv. 76
  Pagett, Rev. Mr. of Truro, iv. 71
  Painter, i. 344――ii. 316
  ―――― of Antrim, i. 351
  ―――― of Trelisick, ii. 99
  Paldys tin mine, ii. 131
  Paleolagi of Montferrat, ii. 369 _bis_
  Paleolagus dynasty, account of, ii. 366. Andronicus 1st and 2nd,
    John 1st and 2nd, quarrels of Theodore, Constantine, Demetrius, and
    Thomas, death of John 2nd, death of Andronicus, Demetrius possessed
    Silybria and aspired to the throne 366. Thomas supported
    Constantine, dissensions of Demetrius and Thomas, Mohammed’s
    advantages therefrom, death of Constantine 367. Thomas retires on
    the taking of Constantinople, Demetrius submits, his death and
    account of his two sons, Thomas’s pension from the pope, Gibbon’s
    contemptuous account of the family fate 368. Refuted 369
  Paleolagus, Andrew, son of Demetrius, ii. 368. Andronicus 366.
    Camilio 365. Camillo 369, 370 _bis_. Constantine 366 _bis_, 369.
    Eighth of that name, and last Emperor 365. Demetrius 366 _bis_.
    Dorothy 365. Daughter of Theodore 374. Her marriage and death 375.
    Emmanuel 366 _bis_. Ferdinando 365, 369. Son of Theodore 374. Lost
    sight of 375. Isidore, a monk 366. John 365 _bis_, 369, 370. Third
    son of Demetrius 369. John 2nd 370. Son of Theodore 374. Lost sight
    of 375. Manuel son of Demetrius 368. Maria 365. Daughter of Theodore
    374. Died unmarried 375. Martha, wife of Theodore, jun. 375. Michael
    366. Prosper 365, 369 _bis_. Theodore 365 _bis_, 366 _bis_, 369,
    375. His life by Mr. Arundell 365. Birth, parentage, reasons for
    leaving Italy 370. In England, and married in 1615, register of his
    marriage imperfect, his issue, did not settle at Landulph before
    1622 with his family 372. Connected with the Arundell or Lower
    family, probably lived at Clifton with Sir Nicholas Lower, his death
    373. Burial, discrepancy of dates, vault and coffin opened,
    appearance of the body 374. His monument, its inscription, arms 365.
    Account of his issue 374. Theodore son of Theodore 374. Died at sea
    375. Thomas 365, 366 _bis_, 369, 370. His character from
    Khalcondylas by Recaut, and by Mahomet 368.――Constantine, iv. 148
  Palestine, i. 130, 411――iii. 129.――Guy, Earl of Warwick’s journey
    to, iv. 113
  Palfer castle, Normandy, iv. 141
  Pallamaunter of Palamaunter family, iii. 269
  ―――― manor, iii. 269
  Pallamonter, i. 247
  Pallas, i. 183
  Pallephant, i. 159
  Palmer, Roger, Earl of Castlemaine, ii. 11. Rev. Mr. refused to
    subscribe the Act of Uniformity 220. His prophecy 221
  Palmerias, Matthias, iv. 148
  Pancras, St. Truro church dedicated to, iv. 8
  ―――― church, London, iii. 148
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 76 _bis_, 80, 81
  Panicum dactylon, iv. 180
  Par, near St. Austell, ii. 18
  Paraguay, ii. 290
  Parc, i. 52
  Paris, iv. 145.――Council of, ii. 90. St. Sampson’s remains removed
    to 90
  ―――― Dr. i. 150, 151. William de 83.――Dr. instituted the Geological
    Society of Cornwall, iii. 95. His works 97. His life of Sir Humphrey
    Davy 95
  Parishes, number of in Cornwall, iv. 166
  Park, i. 367, 369. Account of 205
  Park of Park, i. 207
  ―――― Erisey, iii. 383
  Parke, by Leland, iv. 258
  Parker, i. 61 _ter._ Francis and Sir John 302. Sir Nicholas 125,
    136. Arms 136.――Rev. James, iii. 96
  ―――― of Burrington, Sir Nicholas, Governor of Pendennis castle, his
    arms and character, ii. 12. Death, and burial in Budock church 13
  ―――― of Rathow, arms, ii. 12, 130
  Parkinge family, iv. 138. Heir of 139
  Parkings, Francis, family and arms, iv. 140
  Parliament, memoirs of, ii. 277. Commons House of 38. Camelford
    sends members to 403, 404. Launceston sent two members to 432.
    Favoured Mr. Peters, iii. 73
  Parliament army injured Leskeard, iii. 26. Defeated 17
  ―――― Roll, ii. 170
  Parliament street, Westminster, ii. 295
  ―――― wars, iii. 73
  ―――― writ to Truro, iv. 74
  Parmenter, Mr. of Ilfracombe, iii. 343
  Parr, Queen Catherine, i. 16. Thomas 24
  Parsons, John, iii. 260
  Partridge, Cornish for, i. 243, 244, 245
  Pascentius, i. 326
  Pascoe, Captain, ii. 318. Rev. Mr. 329, 330.――Erasmus, iii. 343.
    Thomas 89. Family 83
  Pashley family, ii. 395
  Passiflora cærulea racemosa, iv. 182
  Passio Christi, an ancient MS. in Cornish, observations upon, App.
    5, iv. 190
  Patagonia, Admiral Byron wrecked on the coast of, iii. 205
  Patefond, William de, i. 246
  Paternus, St. i. 321.――His history, iii. 336
  Patras, a city of Achaia, ii. 367, 369
  Patrick, i. 295.――Mr. iv. 33 _bis_
  ―――― St. i. 250――iii. 331 _bis_, 431.――Cleared all Ireland at once
    of serpents, ii. 298. His meeting with St. German 65
  Patrick’s, St. church, Dublin, iv. 138, 147
  Patten, Miss, iii. 279
  Paul, the Apostle, iii. 284 _bis_.――St. i. 108, 122 _ter._, 198,
    206――ii. 53. His conversion 112
  ―――― Nicholas, iv. 77
  ―――― parish, ii. 174――iii. 78, 79, 84, 275. Church burnt by the
    Spaniards 91
  PAUL parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, iii. 283. St.
    Paulinus, Archbishop of York, memoir of, a vicarage, value of
    benefice, patron, impropriator, incumbent, earlier value 284.
    Editor, parish has not the prefix of St. ibid. Notice of St. Paul
    de Leon, parish feast, attached to Hailes abbey, dedication of
    that abbey by Richard, King of the Romans, relic presented to it
    by his son 285. Its value and history, church and monuments,
    Mousehole town 286. Destroyed by the Spaniards, the church burnt,
    register of the event, Spanish ball preserved, chapel at
    Mousehole, and on St. Clement’s island 287. Change of name from
    Porth Enys, Newlyn, Keigwin family, Godolphins at Treworveneth,
    Trungle 288. Chiowne and the Chinese wall, view from above Newlyn,
    new road, monument to commemorate the finding of a ring 289.
    Curious British ornaments, other similar ones, supposed to have
    been worn by the Druids, statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 290
  Paul pier, iv. 23
  ―――― St. de Leon, notice of, iii. 285.――Name explained, iv. 313
  Paul’s, St. cathedral, London, iii. 167
  ―――― St. church, Covent Garden, iii. 252
  Paulet, Sir John, ii. 363.――Henry, last Duke of Bolton, iii. 47.
    Family 47, 123
  Paulin parish, iii. 425
  Paulinus, Bishop of Rochester, and first Archbishop of York, iii.
    284 _bis_, 285. His history 284
  Paulet, ii. 292
  Pawley, Jane, account of, iii. 8. Family 8 _bis_.――Mr. iv. 74
  Pawton, ii. 362――iii. 175 _bis_
  Paxton, Richard, i. 283
  Payne, John, of St. Ives, ii. 192. John, mayor of St. Ives, his arms 198
  Paynter, i. 359, 360. Rev. C. H., 251. Francis 145, 148 _bis_. John
    348. William 145.――Rev. Thomas, ii. 142. Miss 300. Family 228,
    270.――Mr. iii. 441. Family 445
  ―――― of Boskenna, Francis, i. 359
  ―――― of St. Erth, i. 423
  ―――― of Trelisick, i. 145. Arthur 348, 350. Francis 349, 350 _bis_,
    351, 359. James 350, 359. Mary 359. William 350. Arms 349, 350
  Paynter’s Consultation, i. 148
  Payton, i. 405
  Peace and taxes, commissioners for, John Rame, iv. 129. John Robins 117
  Pearce, James, i. 112.――Family, iii. 60, 83.――Nicholas _ter._ iv. 3.
    Rev. Mr. of Tywardreth 109. Rev. Mr. of Broadoak 185
  Pearce of Penryn, Mr. and Miss, iii. 445
  Pears, John, iii. 6
  Pearse, Rev. Thomas, ii. 92.――Mr. and Miss, iii. 9
  ―――― of Helaton, Thomas, i. 303, 304 _bis_
  Peck, ii. 428
  Peckwater hall, iii. 155
  Pedenandre mine, iii. 382
  Pederick, Little, church, i. 74
  ―――― Little, parish, i. 404
  Pederwin, Pedyrwyn, or St. Pederwin parish, i. 37――iii. 457――iv. 69
  ―――― north, parish 336; or Pedyrwyn, i. 107――iv. 59, 131
  ―――― south, iii. 335; or Pederwyn, ii. 398, 417.――Pedyrwin, or
    Petherwin, iv. 50, 51, 52, 68, 69 _bis_
  Pedyr hundred, i. 230, 245――ii. 253 _bis_――iii. 175
  ―――― St. chapel at Treloye, i. 231
  ―――― St. priory at Bodman, iv. 160
  Pedyrick, Little, parish, ii. 253, 256
  Peel, Sir Robert, ii. 112
  Pegwill church, iii. 349
  Pelagianism, ii. 65. St. Dye opposed to 131
  Pelagians, ii. 63. Of Britain 73
  Pelagius, i. 305――ii. 72, 74. A Briton 63. His doctrines 72. Council
    at St. Albans to consider them, St. German preached against him 64.
    His doctrine contrary to the law and prophets, Britons convinced of
    his errors 65
  ―――― first pope, ii. 90
  ―――― second pope, i. 393
  Pelham, Bishop, iii. 275
  Pellew, Admiral, iii. 96.――Cruised from Falmouth, ii. 18.――Family,
    iii. 94
  Pelniddon, account of by Tonkin, i. 47
  Peloponnesus, ii. 366
  Pelsew, i. 393, 403. Account of 402, 417
  Pelton, i. 116 _bis_
  Pelvellan described, iv. 37
  Pelyn house described, and summer house at, ii. 391
  Pelynt manor, iii. 293
  ―――― parish, ii. 394, 398――iii. 39, 170――iv. 19, 23
  PELYNT parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, manor of Plynt, iii. 291. By the Editor, ancient
    name ibid. Church spacious, monuments, burial-place of St. Juncus,
    Whitaker says the parish is dedicated to St. Nunn, St. David
    distinguished his followers by a leek 292. Church belonged to
    Newenham Abbey, value, Pelynt manor, Hale Barton and ancient
    remains upon it, Trelawn, its history by Bond 293, and that of its
    possessors, three generations of the Grey family annihilated by
    the civil wars, Trelawny family 294. Henry 5th’s partiality for
    Sir John, lines on Launceston gate, Cornish saying of the
    Godolphins, Trelawnys and Glanvilles, Lord Bonville built the
    house, rebuilt by Sir John Trelawny, and after a fire by Edward
    Trelawny, family portraits, chapel built by Bishop Trelawny 295.
    His history, the seven bishops committed to the Tower by James II.
    tried, and acquitted 296. Bishop Trelawny’s part in the
    Revolution, observation on the Duke of Marlborough, the bishop’s
    popularity in Cornwall 297. Cornwall disposed to rise in arms on
    his imprisonment, song upon it, universally sung at the time 298.
    Names of the seven bishops, statue of Cardinal Wolsey at Christ
    Church, Oxford, erected by Trelawny, his son Edward, governor of
    Jamaica, his judicious conduct there 299. History and fanaticism
    of Sir Harry Trelawny 300. Turned papist, priests arrived from
    Italy to celebrate masses for his soul, parish, statistics 301.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 302
  ―――― Church town, iv. 32 _ter._
  ―――― vicarage, iv. 29
  Pembre, Henry de la, ii. 119
  Pembro, by Leland, iv. 267
  Pembroke college, Oxford, ii. 233, 286, 287, 377――iii. 87, 88, 251
  ―――― Jasper, Earl of, ii. 182
  Pembrokeshire, ii. 173
  Pen, word explained, iv. 317
  ―――― Uchel Coit, iii. 25
  Penalmick barton, iv. 2, 4
  ―――― manor, iv. 2
  ―――― of Penalmick family, iv. 2
  Penaluna family, iii. 61
  Penare, account of, i. 204
  Penarth, i. 240.――Walter, iv. 77
  Pencair, by Leland, iv. 264
  Pencaranowe, iii. 326 _ter._, 327, 328
  Pencarow, i. 368. Account of 374
  ―――― of Pencarow, i. 369
  ―――― village, i. 3
  Pencoil, account of, ii. 89
  ―――― John de, ii. 89
  Pencoll, i. 387
  Pencoose, account of, i. 391
  Penda, King of the Mercians, ii. 284――iii. 284――iv. 125
  Pendanlase, iii. 431
  Pendarves, account of, i. 160, 163
  ―――― i. 135, 213, 302. Thomas 273, 276. Rev. Mr. 224.――Alexander,
    ii. 93. Peter 143. Samuel 93. Miss 300. Mr. 114. Arms 93.――Edward W.
    W., iii. 367. Henry 284. Rev. Henry and Margaret 84. Sir William
    382. Family 148 _bis_, 286, 343, 382.――Mr. iv. 2
  ―――― of Pendarves, i. 160, 163, 400, 401. E. W. W. 163, 164, 401,
    403. Rev. Thomas 161. William 160. Sir William 160, 163. Arms
    161.――Family and Miss, ii. 93
  ―――― of Roscrow, Mary, i. 137.――Alexander, his character, Rev. John,
    Mary, ii. 98. Miss 235, 239. Arms 98.――Samuel, iii. 303. Family 133.
    Mrs. Bassett their heir 303.――Family, iv. 107
  Pendeen, Dr. Borlase born at, iii. 51
  ―――― cove, ii. 290
  Pendene, account of, by Hals, ii. 282. By the Editor 284
  Pendenis castle, iv. 116; or Pendennis, iii. 136, 183, 217, 274. Sir
    N. Slanning, governor of 75
  Pendennis, the former name of St. Ives parish, etymology, island,
    old fortification, and chapel upon, ii. 258
  ―――― castle, i. 104, 105, 268――ii. 1 _bis_, 5, 6, 17, 280. Falmouth
    built for its supply 9. Situation, rent to the crown, etymology,
    description, extent, repaired by Henry VIII. and Queen Elizabeth,
    has contained above 100 cannon, and some thousands of foot arms,
    Sir Nicholas Parker appointed governor 12. Succeeded by Sir
    Nicholas Hals, who was succeeded by Sir Nicholas Slanning, and he
    by John Arundell, siege under him by the rebels, dreadful
    extremities, and surrender of the garrison, the last castle in the
    kingdom to yield, except Ragland in Wales 13. Soldiers killed by
    eating too freely, Col. Fortescue succeeded to the command, and
    after him Capt. Fox, who was succeeded on the restoration by Lord
    Arundell, and he by the Earl of Bath 14. The Killigrews lords of
    the land 17. Not Ictis 20. Its longitude 23. Rev. W. Jackman,
    chaplain 31. Governor and officers salaried by the crown 278
  Pender of Penzance, i. 148
  Pendew, account of, i. 324
  Pendinant, by Leland, iv. 271
  Pendinas and its pharos, by Leland, iv. 268
  Pendor, i. 148
  Pendower beach, iv. 123
  Pendragon, etymology, i. 326
  Pendre, i. 143. John, and arms 143
  Pendrea, i. 143 _bis_, 147――ii. 125.――In St. Burian,
    attorney-general Noye, born at, iii. 152
  ―――― Mr. iii. 16
  Pendrym manor, iii. 123
  Penferm, Matthew, iv. 3
  Penfon manor, ii. 232 _bis_――iii. 352
  Penfoune, iii. 352
  ―――― of Penfoune family, iii. 352
  Penfusis, by Leland, iv. 271
  Pengaer, iii. 225
  Pengally, i. 61
  Pengarswick, account of, i. 124
  Pengelly, i. 119 _bis_, 127――ii. 89
  Pengover, iii. 173
  Pengreap, ii. 133
  Penhale, i. 380, 387, 388.――In Egloskerry, iii. 137
  Penhall manor, iii. 313
  Penhallam, ii. 233
  Penhallinyk, ii. 140
  Penhallow, iii. 193
  ―――― Miss, iii. 421
  Penhalluwick, William, ii. 160
  Penhargard manor, ii. 153
  Penheale, i. 378. Account of 379
  Penhele in Egloskerry manor, iv. 60
  Penhell tenement, iii. 209
  Penhellick, account of, i. 207, 208
  ―――― Rev. Mr. ii. 118
  Penitentiaries, i. 232
  Penkevil of Penkevil family, iii. 214
  Penkevill, iii. 454. Tenement 209, 210. Account of 214
  Penkivell manor, iii. 182, 208
  ―――― arms, i. 297.――Family, ii. 336
  ―――― of Pensiquillis family, and Benjamin, i. 420
  ―――― of Ressuna, Richard, i. 297
  ―――― of Trematon, i. 297
  ―――― St. Michael, parish, i. 116
  Penknek, by Leland, iv. 277
  Penkridge, deanery of, in Herts, held by Tregony Archbishop of
    Dublin, iv. 144
  Penkwek, iii. 26, 27
  Penlee point, iii. 375
  Penleton bridge, i. 119
  Penlyer, Mr. 296
  Penmear manor, iii. 239
  Penn, Captain, ii. 25――iii. 85
  Pennalerick, Miss, iii. 62
  Pennalyky, William, iii. 324
  Pennance, account of, i. 257
  Pennans, account of, i. 255
  Pennant, i. 178 _bis_, 184. Account of 383
  Penneck family, ii. 217, 218. Origin 217. Anne, Catherine and
    Charles 218. Rev. John 217. Father and son 123, 218. Family
    monuments 219
  Pennington, i. 304
  Penniscen, iii. 283
  Pennock, ii. 170
  Pennore or Penarth, account of, ii. 113
  Pennycumquick, houses at Falmouth so called, story of the name, the
    same by Mr. Wynn, ii. 20
  Penpell, i. 243
  Penpoll, i. 247――iii. 343 _bis_, in St. Germans and Quethiock 359
  Penpons, account of, ii. 336
  ―――― of Penpons, ii. 335
  Penqueen, i. 118
  Penquite, ii. 91
  Penrey, iii. 305
  Penrice, i. 43, 47. Etymology 43
  Penrin, Mr. ii. 97
  Penrine, by Leland, iv. 271
  Penrith, ii. 76
  Penros, account of, iii. 429
  Penrose, i. 132, 346, 386――iv. 97
  ―――― ii. 157. Rev. John, his character 104. Martha 30, 32. Captain
    Thomas, his history 25. Journal 26, 27, 28, presented with a medal
    by the King of Sweden 27. His scuffle with Cornish seamen 29. Trial,
    conviction, pardon, death, and issue 30.――John and Richard, iii.
    324. William 324 _bis_. Mr. 112.――Admiral C. V. iv. 158. Notice of
    158, 159
  ―――― of Lefeock, Martha and Thomas, iii. 186
  ―――― of Nance in St. Martin’s in Kerrier, iii. 188
  ―――― of Penrose, Edward, and Richard, iii. 444. Miss 9 _bis_, 444,
    445. Mr. 442, 443. His house and hospitality 443. Family 443, 445.
    Arms 443
  ―――― of Tregethes, i. 364
  ―――― manor, iii. 445. Account of 443. Possessors 445
  Penryn, meaning of, iii. 327
  ―――― borough, account of, ii. 94. Corporation 8, 9. Members for, F.
    Basset 243. Sir William Lemon 229. Richard Penwarne 75
  ―――― hundred, ii. 51, 92
  ―――― manor, i. 231――iii. 2 _bis_, 226.――Bishop of Exeter, Lord of,
    ii. 51
  ―――― parish, i. 138, 242, 379
  ―――― river, iii. 231
  ―――― town, ii. 2, 17, 69, 96, 100, 113, 140, 215――iii. 62,
    64.――Ships obliged to go up to, ii. 9. United with Falmouth
    99.――Road from Helston to, iii. 63
  Penryn Penwid, iii. 431
  Pensandes, by Leland, iv. 265
  Pensants, by Leland, iv. 286
  Pensiquillis, account of, i. 420
  Penstruan, account of, i. 421
  Pentavale Fenton, iii. 394. Its etymology 395
  Pentavall, ii. 1
  Penter’s cross village, iii. 346
  Pentewan, account of by Hals, i. 41
  ―――― manor, iii. 190
  ―――― quarry, iv. 104.――By Editor, i. 50. Streamworks 51
  ―――― stone, iv. 104
  Pentillie, account of, iii. 163. Fine house built there 166
  ―――― castle, account of, iii. 346. Church aisle belonging to 346
  Pentilly, i. 316. Account of 314
  Pentine, Avice and Richard, ii. 398
  Pentire of Pentire family and heiress, iii. 193
  ―――― of Pentire in Minvor and of Pentewan in Mevagissey, Jane, iii.
    314 _bis_. Philip and family 314
  ―――― of Petuan, i. 384
  ―――― point, i. 381――iii. 240, 281. Its latitude and longitude 281
  Pentnar, i. 419
  Pentowen, by Leland, iv. 275
  Pentuan, i. 49
  ―――― manor, possessors of, iii. 193
  Pentwan, account of, by Tonkin, i. 47
  ―――― Lower, described, i. 47
  Pentybers Rok, iv. 238
  Penuans, i. 234
  Penularick, Miss, iii. 60
  Penvose head, iv. 94
  Penwarne, i. 236
  ―――― in Mawnan, i. 46――iii. 74 _bis_. Account of 75, 76. Sold 77
  ―――― in Mevagissey manor, iii. 192. Its possessors 191, 193
  ―――― i. 255.――Richard, ii. 9. He procured copies of the letters of
    Sir Nicholas Hals 10.――Richard, iii. 324, 325
  ―――― of Penwarne in Mawnan, John _bis_ iii. 77. Peter 76. His death
    77. Richard 75, 325. Robert, _bis_, 75. Robert and Thomas 77. Family
    75, 193. Arms 75, 77
  ―――― of Penwarne in Mevagissey, Vivian, iii. 193. The heir, and
    family 191
  Penwerris, i. 137
  Penwinnick manor, iii. 382
  Penwith hundred, i. 160, 228, 261, 344――ii. 118 _bis_, 141, 145,
    146, 169, 214, 234, 257, 269, 272, 282, 358――iii. 5, 30, 46, 78,
    140, 242, 283, 306, 339, 380, 381, 425 _bis_, 428――iv. 52, 53
    _bis_, 164 _bis_, 377.――Stone circles in, i. 141
  Penwortha manor, iii. 314, 315. Account of 314
  ―――― village, iii. 314 _bis_
  Penwyne, account of, iii. 66
  Penycuick, near Edinburgh, ii. 20
  Penydarran on the Taff, ii. 20
  Penzance, name explained, iv. 316
  ―――― borough, corporation of, iii. 90
  ―――― manor, iii. 91
  ―――― market, iii. 385
  ―――― town, i. 149――ii. 82, 120, 124 _bis_, 174, 214, 215 _bis_, 216,
    266, 287, 352――iii. 34, 55, 78, 275, 286, 287, 290, 342, 375――iv.
    166.――Account of, iii. 81, 83, 91.――London newspapers at and post
    to, i. 59.――Burnt, rebuilt, incorporated, its jurisdiction, a
    coinage town, its market, fairs, it favoured the royalists, and
    was sacked by the parliament army, iii. 81. Custom house, arms,
    and form of writ 82. Dr. Borlase educated at 51.――Exceeds Truro in
    beauty and in trade, iv. 85. Mr. Thompson died at 109
  Peran Arwothan, ii. 92
  ―――― Uthno, ii. 169
  ―――― well, ii. 2, 129
  Peransabulo, i. 289
  Peransand, i. 198――ii. 93, 173, 315, 317
  ―――― church, iii. 176
  Peranwell parish, iv. 1
  Perceval, Mrs. i. 163, 400
  Percivall, John, married Thomasine Bonaventure, lord mayor, and
    knighted, his death, iv. 134
  Perer, Richard, ii. 209
  Pereth, ii. 76
  Perin in Cornwall, news from, ii. 100
  Perkin, Mr. iii. 87 _bis_
  ―――― Warbeck took sanctuary at Beaulieu abbey, ii. 329
  Pernall, John, iv. 77
  Perr river, i. 44, 45
  Perran cove, iii. 309
  ―――― St. ii. 113――iii. 304, 309.――Visits St. Keverne, ii. 324.――His
    estimation, the supposed discoverer of tin, iii. 330. His history
    331, 332. His miracles 313. His great age, his shrine and banner
    332. His day 311
  ――――’s St. chapel or oratory, account of, iii. 329
  ――――’s St. college in Keverne, iii. 332
  ―――― Arworthall church, iii. 304
  PERRAN ARWORTHALL parish, or ST. PIRAN ARWORTHALL, in Kerrier.
    Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, manor of Arworthall, iii.
    302. Quantities of tin upon it, chalybeate spring, Renaudin family
    303. By the Editor, saint, church, Perran Well village, change of
    road, smelting-house, extensive use of arsenic, its sublimation from
    ores 304. Ironworks of Messrs. Fox, beautiful valley, impropriation,
    advowson, statistics 305. Geology by Dr. Boase 306
  ―――― Arworthall, St. parish, iii. 224. In Kerrier 328
  ―――― Arworthall village, iii. 303
  ―――― Uthno manor, iii. 311
  PERRAN UTHNO parish, or LITTLE PERRAN. Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii.
    306. Manor of Uthno 307. By Editor, church, its situation, memorial
    to Mr. Davies, the oath of deans rural ibid. Oracular well, emptied
    by a mine, good farmhouses, Goldsithney village, its chapel 308.
    Image of St. Perran or St. James, fair, transferred here from
    Sithney, displaying of a glove at fairs, destruction of the Lionesse
    country, and cove where Trevelyan was borne on shore 309. High tide
    in 1099, noticed by Stow, the Godwyn sands, Editor’s opinion of the
    tale, attempt to restore the land by incantation 310. Acton castle,
    Cudden point, view from it, children go there to seek a silver
    table, manor of Uthno, and of Lan Uthno, in St. Erth, feast,
    statistics 311. Population increased in consequence of mining and
    agriculture, Chapel an Crouse, bowling green, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 312
  Perran well, or St. Perran’s well, iii. 303, 304. Curious account of
    308. Its virtues 329
  ―――― well village, situation, iii. 304
  ―――― Zabuloe parish, iii. 304, 386
  PERRAN ZABULOE, PERANSAND, or PERRAN IN THE SANDS. Hals’s MS. lost.
    By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation and boundaries, iii. 312.
    Ridiculous legend of St. Perran, his great age, patron of the
    tinners, tales told of him, fair, value of the benefice, patron,
    impropriation, incumbent, manor of Penhall and Halwyn, of
    Tywarnhaile, and of Tywarnhaile Tiers 313. Tywarnhaile house,
    Chapel Angarder, Penwortha manor, tin and lead upon it, Lambourne
    Wigan 314. Its history 315. Manor of Lambourn, its history 316.
    Creeg Mear, urns in it, conjectures respecting it 319. Castle
    Kaerkief, Whitaker’s opinion of it 320. Callestock Veor village,
    other entrenchments of no importance 321. Other two, Tresawsen, or
    Bosawson, the three barrows and four barrows, chapel in
    Callestock, Fenton Berram, manor of Fenton Gymps 322.
    Marghessen-foos village, practice of maids coming to market to
    offer themselves for hire, etymology of Marghessen-foos 323. Roman
    roads, Fenton Gymps family 324. Chywarton, Callestock-Ruol 325.
    Trevellance or Pencaranowe manor, its history, Reenwartha 326.
    Reen Wollas, Melingybridge 327. Manor of St. Piran, some tin on
    it, account of Piran round 328. By Editor, etymology ibid.
    Description of Piran round, the Guary Mir, “the Creation of the
    World,” and “Mount Calvary,” published by the Editor, St. Piran’s
    well supposed to cure diseases, encroachments of the sand,
    discovery and description of a chapel supposed to be St. Perran’s
    oratory 329. Defaced for relics, St. Perran esteemed the patron of
    all Cornwall, his day celebrated with great hilarity, a Perraner,
    St. Chiwidden, Dr. Butler’s Lives of the Saints 330. His history
    of St. Perran or St. Kiaran, went to Rome, was of the clan Osraig,
    died in Cornwall 331. Probably an active missionary, his banner
    the standard of Cornwall, his shrine, impropriation of tithes,
    incumbent 332. Chiverton, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 333
  Perranbonse cove, ii. 360
  Perraner, iii. 330
  Perre, Thomas, iii. 387
  Perrin, Provost of Taunton, i. 86
  Perron, St. Arworthal, ii. 17
  Perry, i. 236
  Persia, iii. 187
  Persius, iv. 87
  Perthcolumb, account of, i. 364
  Perthcothen, iii. 177
  Perthsasnac, ii. 165
  Perthtowan, ii. 250
  Perwennack, i. 11
  Pesaro in Italy, ii. 369, 370, 371, 373. Theodore Paleolagus of 365
  Pesseme, Patrick, ii. 160
  Peter, Rev. John, ii. 117
  ―――― of Harlyn, Francis, iii. 176, 177. Gregory 175, 176 _bis_. John
    76, 166, 176 _bis_. William 176 _bis_, 178 _bis_, 333. Mr. 178. Mr.
    erected a pier 179. Family 177
  ―――― of Porthcuthan, or Perthcothen. Mr. iii. 177. Family 162
  ―――― of Treater, John, ii. 336.――In Padstow, Thomas, iii. 176 _bis_
  ―――― of Trenaran in Padstow, John, iii. 176 _ter._ Arms 176
  ―――― St. i. 197, 198 _bis_――ii. 127.――Younger brother of St. Andrew,
    iv. 100
  Peter’s spring, iii. 72
  ―――― St. church, Rome, iv. 165
  Peterborough, Thomas White, bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Peters, i. 382. Hugh 420. Mr. 296.――Rev. Mr. ii. 218.――Rev. Charles
    of St. Maben, his learning and character, iii. 67, 68. His
    biography, his ancestor a royalist 67. Dined his poor parishioners,
    his controversy with Warburton, extracts from his meditations 68.
    Elizabeth 72. Rev. Hugh 67, 71, 72. His biography 72. Rev. Jonathan,
    of St. Clement’s, Dr. Joseph, of Truro 68. Rev. Thomas and William
    71. Biographical notice of 72
  Petersfield parish, iii. 206
  PETHERICK, LITTLE, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation and
    boundaries, saint, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, ancient
    name, iii. 334. By the Editor, present patron, church, and church
    town, Tregonnen village, St. Ida’s chapel ibid. Account of St. Ida,
    her husband a favourite of Charlemagne, another chapel on Trevelian
    farm, former name of the parish, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 335
  Petherick, Little, parish, iii. 277
  Petherwin, North, i. 377
  PETHERWIN, OR PEDERWIN, SOUTH, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin
    and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, iii. 335. St. Peternus, three
    days dedicated to him, value of benefice, impropriation 336. By the
    Editor, church, its monuments and situation ib. Annual fairs,
    Trecroogo, Tregallen and Trethevy villages, Trebersey, Mr. Gedy an
    ancestor of the Editor, Tresmarrow, Tremeal 337. Death of Mrs.
    Archer, an epitaph, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 338
  Petnell, St. or Petronel, iv. 153 _bis_
  Petre, Sir John, obtained church lands, was ancestor of Lord Petre,
    founded eight fellowships at Oxford, iii. 155. Sir John 293. Sir
    William 155. Lord Petre of Exeter, now of Essex 176
  ―――― of Torbryan, Devon, John, iii. 155
  Petroc, St. iii. 277, 278 _bis_. His life 227. His history, i. 95.
    His body stolen 98
  ―――― St. church, iii. 408. Bodmin 277. The Cornish see 415. This
    is disputed by Mr. Whitaker 408. proved by extracts from a register
    kept there in a book containing the four Gospels 408
  ――――’s, St. monastery, iii. 309. At Padstow, destroyed by the Danes 281
  ―――― St. priory, Bodmin, i. 116
  Petrocstow, iii. 277
  Pettigrew manor, ii. 57
  Petunia nyctaginiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― Phœnicia, iv. 182
  Petvin, John, iii. 313
  Pevensey marsh, iii. 10
  Pever, the heiress of, ii. 109
  Peverell, Sir Hugh, and Sir Thomas, i. 92
  ―――― of Hatfield, Jane, wife of Randolph, and concubine of William
    the Conqueror, i. 367 _ter._ William her son 367
  ―――― of park, i. 367. Richard Thomas, and arms 368
  Peverell’s crosses, i. 368
  Pewterers’ company send a deputy to try the Cornish tin, ii. 30
  Peyron, father, i. 192
  Philack, i. 344
  Philip and Mary, iii. 213, 294, 325
  ―――― King of France invaded Normandy in Richard’s absence, ii. 177
  Philipps, i. 78
  Philips, Jasper, iii. 339. Sir Jonathan 458. His servant 461
  ―――― of Pendrea, Samuel and Sarah, ii. 352
  ―――― of Poughill, ii. 300
  Phillack, i. 355.――Parish, ii. 141, 145, 146 _bis_, 147
  PHILLACK, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation
    boundaries, saint, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii. 339. By
    the Editor, church, situation of village, danger from the sand,
    inundations of sand, hillocks of it ibid. Houses buried under it,
    Towan, extension of trade, improvement of the harbour, mining and
    smelting, Mr. Edwards 340. Rivalship with Mr. Harvey, both improved
    the harbour, bars in the mouths of all rivers, a causeway upon
    arches across the entrance of the main estuary 341. Castle Cayle,
    and Riviere at Theodore’s castle, Mr. Whitaker’s invention, new
    house at Riviere, Trevassack 342. Modern house on Bodrigy, Penpoll,
    Treglisson farm, copper works at Hoyle, smelting house at Angarrack,
    fine garden there, advowson 343. Incumbent, present rector and
    patron, parish feast and statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, Sand
    hills, sand restrained by plants 344. Sometimes consolidated into
    sandstone. By Editor, copper lodes and elvan courses, Whele Alfred 345
  Philleigh parish, ii. 265
  Philley parish, ii. 2, 275 _bis_, 279――iii. 402, 403
  Phillips, Matthew, i. 360, 362.――Rev. Jasper, ii. 146. Mary 269.
    Rev. William 386, 406. His monument at Lanteglos 406. Mr. 150, 386, 389
  ―――― of Carnequidden in Gulval, Henry and Jane, ii. 241
  ―――― of Landue, Thomas, ii. 400
  ―――― of Pendrea, Samuel, ii. 269, 352. Sarah 352
  ―――― of Tredrea, Elizabeth, iii. 159
  ―――― of Botreaux castle, T. J. iii. 236 _bis_
  ―――― of Camelford, Charles, John, and Jonathan, i. 380. Sir Jonathan
    134.――Rev. William 380.――Charles, ii. 399 _bis_. Jonathan, Rev.
    William, name 399.――Sir Jonathan and T. W. iii. 235
  Phillipps, Rev. William and family, i. 3.――J. T., iii. 42
  ―――― of Camelford and Newport family, iii. 42
  ―――― of Landue in Lezant, Mr. iii. 235
  ―――― of Trencares, Charles and Sir Jonathan, iv. 45. Rev. William
    45, _bis_. Story of 46. Miss, Mr. and family property 45
  Philological inquiries, ii. 103
  Philopatris, age of, ii. 76
  Philosophical Transactions, i. 149――iii. 250, 251, 378――iv.
    146.――Account of a storm in, ii. 325
  Phœnician castles, ii. 423
  Phœnicians, ii. 3――iii. 395――iv. 168.――Acquainted with Falmouth
    harbour, ii. 19
  Phœnix in her Flames, a tragedy, iv. 97
  “Phraseologia, Latin and English,” iv. 87
  Physalis edulis, iv. 183
  Picardy, pronunciation in, ii. 127
  Pider hundred, i. 9, 209, 231, 232, 289, 386, 388, 407――ii. 253,
    378, 384――iii. 139, 267, 277, 312, 318, 334――iv. 137, 140, 160
    _bis_, 162
  Pidre, iv. 376.――Etymology, i. 9
  Pig’s street, Penryn, iii. 62
  Pilate, iii. 422
  Pilchards, nature of, ii. 263. Methods of fishing for 261. Of
    preserving, oil from 263. Caught by seine nets at St. Keverne 324
  Pillaton, or Pillton manor, iii. 345, 346
  ―――― parish, i. 103, 104, 316――ii. 361, 364――iii. 161, 371
  PILLATON parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    a rectory, value, patron, manor, iii. 345. By the Editor, Lysons on
    Pillaton and Hardenfast manors, Pentillie castle, church and its
    monuments, one to the Rev. Mr. Eliot, church, town small, Penter’s
    cross village, patron 346. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 347
  Pinard, Arthur, ii. 423
  Pinaster fir, account of, iii. 11
  Pincerna, etymology of, ii. 148
  ―――― Richard, ii. 148. Simon 145, _bis_, 146 _bis_.――Simon, iii.
    139. Heir 140 _ter._ Family 140
  Pindar, iii. 34
  ―――― Peter, iii. 220
  Pineck parish, i. 414――ii. 142.――St. iv. 128
  Pinneck, John, ii. 170
  Pinnock, St. parish, iii. 13, 260
  PINNOCK, St. parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii. 347. By the
    Editor, village, and manor of Trevillis, proprietors of land,
    advowson, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 348
  Pinock, ii. 157
  Pipe Rolls, ii. 423
  Piper, Hugh, and Sir Hugh Constables of Launceston castle, anecdote
    of Sir Hugh, ii. 421. His monument in Launceston church 422.――Miss,
    iii. 136. Heiress and family 337
  Piran bay, iii. 313
  ―――― parish, iii. 324
  ―――― round, iii. 328. Account of 329――iv. 78
  ―――― Arworthall church, iv. 3
  ―――― St. church lands, iii. 328
  ―――― St. family, iii. 328
  ―――― St. manor, account of, iii. 328
  ―――― St. parish, iv. 2 _ter._ Mr. Reed’s smelting house in 4
  ―――― St. in the Sands parish, iii. 267
  ―――― St. in the Sands town, iii. 332
  Piran’s, St. well, iii. 322
  Piranes, St. in the Sands, by Leland, iv. 268
  ―――― St. or Keverine, by Leland, iv. 270
  Pirran in Treth parish, iii. 323
  Piskies or fairies, i. 18
  Pitleman, Ralph, ii. 427
  Pits’ writings on Britain, ii. 62
  Pits, iv. 145 _bis_, 148, de Illustribus Angliæ Scriptoribus 148
  Pitt, Robert, i. 69. Thomas 69 _bis_. Thomas 1st Lord Camelford 69.
    His talents 71. Thomas 66, 67. His descent, enterprise in India,
    return with diamond, its sale to the Regent Orleans, its weight, his
    purchase of Boconnoc and the burgess tenures of Old Sarum, election
    for Old Sarum 68. Thomas 2nd Lord Camelford, his birth and
    christening, education, history, character 70. Death 71. William,
    Earl of Chatham 69.――Family, ii. 339, 376, 412. Thomas 353, 354,
    409, 410. William 339. Governor 353. Mr. 410. Pleased with Dr.
    Glynn’s invitations 154.――Thomas, iii. 450. Mr. 207. Governor
    450.――Mr. iv. 44
  ―――― of Boconnock, Thomas, ii. 405
  Pitz, Rev. Mr. ii. 258――iv. 53
  Pius 2nd, pope, iv. 146
  Place of death, i. 9
  Place or Plase, i. 28
  Placentia, iii. 400
  ―――― University, i. 311
  Plague at St. Cuthbert, i. 292.――At St. Ives, ii. 271
  Plain-an-Guary, iii. 384
  Plantagenet, Princess Elizabeth, i. 63. Princess Katherine
    64.――Humphrey 4th son of King Henry 4th, ii. 260. Margaret,
    Countess of Salisbury 91. Richard Earl or Cornwall 155.――Richard,
    iii. 27
  ―――― or Beaufort, Edmund, Edmund Marquis of Dorset, and Henry, ii.
    260.――Margaret, iii. 65
  ―――― civil wars, iii. 289
  ―――― house of, ii. 110, 249
  Plantagenets, iii. 84, 246. Their times 8, 348――iv. 114
  Plants of Cornwall, App. 3, iv. 180
  Plase, ii. 40. Account of 43
  Plassey, battle of, i. 390――iv. 11
  Pleas of the crown, i. 119, 177
  Plegmund, Archbishop, i. 95
  Plengway village, Amphitheatre at, iii. 384
  Plint, i. 316
  Pliny, i. 192――ii. 408――iii. 328
  Plot’s, Dr. Natural History of Oxford, iii. 323
  Plowden, William, iii. 38. Mr. 37. Family 38
  Pluwent or Plynt, iii. 291
  Plym river, ii. 2
  Plymouth breakwater, ii. 245
  ―――― castle, i. 105――ii. 10
  ―――― church, dedicated to St. Charles, ii. 20
  ―――― dockyard, high water at, iii. 375
  ―――― harbour, iii. 101, 105, 108, 164, 375, 461.――Superior to
    Falmouth for large ships, ii. 18
  ―――― limestone, iv. 123 _bis_.――Burnt for manure, ii. 361
  ―――― reef or breakwater described, iii. 108. Compared with the great
    Egyptian pyramid 109
  ―――― road, ii. 396
  ―――― sound, i. 189――ii. 45, 108 _bis_, 164, 375, 379, 380. French
    and Spanish fleets in, ii. 245
  ―――― town, i. 113 _bis_――ii. 10, 224――iii. 21, 45, 98, 109, 110,
    121, 183, 189, 196, 253, 254, 283, 378, 399, 426――iv. 32, 115, 116,
    123, 187, 188 _ter._――Ruthven, governor of, i. 113.――Relief of,
    incompetent to sustain an attack, ii. 245. Cornish miners marched to
    defend, open to attack but escaped it, Major Trelawny, governor of
    67. Engagement with Dutch fleet before 25.――Dr. Borlase educated at,
    iii. 51. Besieged by Charles’s troops, Earl of Stamford, governor
    184.――General Trelawny, governor of, iv. 94. Siege of 185 _ter._
  Plympton, i. 170――iv. 185
  ―――― priory, i. 27――ii. 339――iii. 139 _bis_. Prior of 139
    _bis_.――Godfrey, prior of, ii. 426
  Plynt parish, ii. 409
  Pochehelle, iii. 349
  Poictiers, Archdeacon of, ii. 415
  ―――― Bishop of, St. Hilary, ii. 168, 169. Died at 169
  ―――― Earl of, Richard, ii. 422
  Point, the, iii. 107, 108
  Pol, St. de Leon, town, in Brittany, iii. 285
  Polamonter, Nicholas, i. 234
  Poland, i. 336
  Polbenro, account of, iv. 36
  Poldice mine, ii. 134
  Pole, Sir Courtenay and Penelope, ii. 379.――Rev. Reginald, iii.
    440.――De la, Edmund, Earl of Suffolk, i. 86
  ―――― Carew, Mrs. R., iii. 229
  Polglase, account of, i. 399
  Polgoda, ii. 173
  Polgooth mine, iii. 198. Account of 195, 197
  Polgorran, account of, ii. 113
  Polgover, iii. 252――iv. 3
  Poljew cove, ii. 129
  Polkerris harbour, iv. 109
  Polkinghorne, Roger, iii. 83
  Polkinhorn, iii. 387
  Polkinhorne, account of, ii. 142
  ―――― Degary, i. 257.――Mr. ii. 157. Rev. Mr. 258, 260
  ―――― of Polkinhorne, family, heir, and arms, iii. 142
  Polland, Lewis, ii. 195
  Pollard, Peter, i. 216.――Christopher, iii. 358
  ―――― of Treleigh, Hugh, John, John a tribute to, Margaret and
    family, iii. 383
  Polleowe, iii. 326
  Pollephant, i. 308
  Pollrewen tower, iv. 229
  Pollyfont or Pollifont manor, iii. 38, 39. In Lewannick 233 _bis_
  Polman, ii. 41
  Polmanter downs, ii. 271
  Polmear cove, iv. 166
  Polpear, iii. 7
  Polpera or Polperro, iv. 23, 36, 38
  Polperro harbour, ii. 400
  ―――― town, ii. 400 _bis_. Scenery beautiful 400, 401
  Polruan, ii. 411――iv. 36.――Account of, ii. 411.――By Leland, iv. 279,
    290.――Formerly a corporate borough, ii. 412
  Polruddon ruins, by Norden and Lysons, i. 46
  Polskatho or Porthskatho, ii. 51
  Polston, bridge at, ii. 432.――Bridge, Charles 1st entered Cornwall
    by, iv. 185
  Poltare, account of, iii. 88
  Poltesca, iii. 424
  Polton manor, ii. 253
  Polvellan, iii. 229. Etymology 230
  Polventon, iv. 29
  Polvessan, account of, iv. 133. The grounds in a fine state 35
  Polvethan manor, ii. 400
  Polwhele, account of, i. 205
  ―――― castle, iv. 229
  ―――― i. 56 _bis_, 58, 205, 255. Degory 19, 293. Arms 205. Motto
    206.――Family, ii. 337.――Rev. Richard of Manaccan and Newlyn, iii.
    113, 271. Character of 112.――Rev. Richard came from Truro, iv. 86.
    Rev. Richard communicated to the Editor some missing portions of
    Hals’s MS. 184
  ―――― of Newland, i. 105
  ―――― of Penhellick, John and Robert, i. 207
  ―――― of Polwhele, i. 207. Degory ibid. Drew 207 _bis_. John 206,
    207. Richard 207. Rev. Rich., 208
  ―――― of Treworgan, i. 396. John ibid.
  ――――’s History of Cornwall, i. 288
  Polybius, on Signals, the friend of Scipio Africanus, his general
    history, iii. 106
  Polychronicon, author of, iv. 93
  Polyenetes, or the Martyr, a tragedy, iv. 97
  Polyfunt in Trewenn, iv. 68
  Polygala speciosa, iv. 183
  ―――― myrtifolia, iv. 183
  Pomeray, i. 348
  ―――― Henry de la, ii. 180, 183. Took St. Michael’s mount 177.
    Murdered a sergeant-at-arms, his stratagem for surprising Mount St.
    Michael 178. Held it out, submitted, his death 180; or Pomeroye,
    Henry de la, iii. 22, 78, 90
  Pomeroy, Henry de, i. 295, 296. Henry 296 _bis_. Sir Henry 296. Sir
    Hugh 214. Joel 296 _bis_. Josceline, Ralph de, and Sir Roger 296.
    Thomas 214. Arms 297.――Rev. John, ii. 279, 339. Mr. 43.――Family,
    iii. 90. John 260
  Pomeroy of Bury Pomeroy, Devon, Sir Richard, iii. 148. Lords of Bury
    Pomeroy 90
  ―――― of Tregony Pomeroy, i. 297 _bis_. Henry 297
  Pomery, Rev. Mr. i. 403.――Rev. Joseph, iii. 348 _bis_.――Mr. iv. 160
  Pomier, Lord, ii. 39
  Pondicherry, siege of, chief seat of French power in India, iv. 11
  Ponsanmouth, iv. 3
  Ponsmur, i. 256
  Pontis Riale river, source of, iv. 237
  Pontus, i. 388 _bis_
  Pool mine, ii. 239
  Poole, account of by Hals, iii. 168. By Tonkin 170
  Pooley, Rev. Mr. ii. 34.――Rev. Henry of Newlin, iii. 271, 275
  Poor Knights of Windsor, Hugh Trevanion one of, ii. 52, 54. Governor
    of 55
  ―――― rates at Helston, ii. 159
  Pope of Rome, i. 139, 146――ii. 371. Urged Richard to the crusades
    177. Lodged Thomas Paleolagus, and allowed him a pension 368. His
    protection of him 371.――Alexander the 4th, i. 176.――Boniface, ii.
    288. Gregory 290. Gregory the Great 287. St. Gregory 288.――Gregory
    9th, i. 312. Innocent 3rd 110, 112. Innocent the 4th 176. Innocent
    the 5th 110. Leo the 9th 110 _ter._ Nicholas the 2nd 110. Pelagius
    the 2nd 393. Victor the 2nd 110 _bis_
  ―――― Alexander, the poet, i. 58――iii. 53 _ter._ His letter to Dr.
    Borlase 53. Mr. his large fortune, and house called the Vatican 88
  ――――’s annates, ii. 59, 126
  ―――― inquisition into the value of benefices, iv. 185. _See
    Inquisition_
  Popham, Sir Home and Captain, iii. 446
  Population of Cornwall, App. II. iv. 178. Of all the parishes in
    Cornwall from the last parliamentary statements 177. For several
    years from 1700 to 1831, 178
  ―――― return for Helston, ii. 161
  Porkellis, neighbourhood produced the best tin in Cornwall, ii. 140
  Porrown Berry, iii. 202
  Port, Hugo de, iii. 115
  Port Eliot, ii. 68, 70 _bis_――iii. 107
  ―――― Isaac, i. 384, 385――iv. 47
  ―――― Looe, iii. 249
  ―――― Looe barton, iv. 25, 26, 37 _bis_
  ―――― Prior, name changed, iii. 107
  Portbend, high water at, iii. 98
  Portbyhan, otherwise West Looe, iv. 28
  Portello, lands of, iii. 294
  Porter, i. 320.――Mr. and arms, iii. 66.――Charles, iv. 62. Rev.
    Charles of Warbstow 125
  Porth, i. 29
  Porth Alla, ii. 250, 324, 330 _bis_, 331. The stream which
    discharges at 330
  ―――― chapel, i. 12
  ―――― Enys, iii. 288. Name changed 286
  ―――― Horne, i. 324――ii. 174, 200
  ―――― Kernow, iii. 32.――Shells at, i. 148
  ―――― Prior, now Port Eliot, ii. 66
  ―――― Talland, iv. 24
  ―――― Treth, ii. 239
  Portheran, ii. 41
  Porthguin, by Leland, iv. 259
  Porthiley, iii. 129
  Porthissek, by Leland, iv. 259
  Porthleaven, iii. 444
  Porthmear, i. 47
  Porthmellin cove, iii. 192
  Porthoustock, ii. 324――iii. 259.――Extraordinary shoal of pilchards
    at, ii. 324
  ―――― rock, ii. 331
  Porthpean, i. 49
  Porthskatho cove, ii. 58
  Porthwrinkle, iii. 439
  Portionists, iv. 45
  Portnadle bay, iv. 28
  Porto Bello, iii. 218
  Portreath, ii. 241, 250.――Harbour, iii. 390.――A safe harbour, used
    to exchange copper for coal, ii. 241
  Portsmouth, ii. 246. Loss of the Mary Rose off 342
  ―――― castle, ii. 10
  ―――― harbour superior to Falmouth for large ships, ii. 18
  ―――― town, ii. 10
  Portuan borough, iv. 20, 21
  ―――― manor, iv. 21
  Portugal, ii. 227――iii. 187, 423
  Post, in Queen Elizabeth’s time, i. 59
  Potatoes being introduced into Cornwall, iv. 50
  Potstone, iv. 70
  Pott, John, iii. 16
  Poughill parish, ii. 340, 430――iv. 12, 15
  POUGHILL parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, ancient name, impropriation,
    Pochehelle manor, iii. 349. By the Editor, small, its advantages,
    manor ibid. The charters, murder of Nicholas Radford 350. Flexbury
    and Bushill, impropriator of tithes, Stamford-hill and Sir B.
    Granville’s victory there, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 351
  Poul pier, by Leland, iv. 290
  Poulpirrhe, by Leland, iv. 279
  Poulton manor, iii. 2
  Poundstock parish, ii. 232――iii. 114――iv. 15, 136
  POUNDSTOCK parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, impropriation, patron, incumbent,
    Trebarfoot, Penfoune, manor of Poundstock, iii. 352. By the Editor,
    situation of church, Tregoll, manors of Launcels, West Widemouth and
    Woolston, great tithes, advowson, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 353
  Powder hundred, i. 41, 52, 202, 388, 393――iii. 24, 55, 180, 190
    _bis_, 195, 198, 207, 210, 354, 391, 395, 402 _ter._, 403, 448,
    450――iv. 70, 71, 75, 97, 102, 115, 116, 117.――Powdre, i. 242, 251,
    294, 413――ii. 24, 36, 50, 88, 105, 275 _bis_, 298, 315, 352, 356,
    390――iv. 376
  Powderham hundred, etymology, i. 15
  Powell, David, i. 305
  Powley, Hugh, iii. 6
  Powvallet Coyt manor, ii. 38
  Poyctou, iv. 144
  Poyntz, of Berkshire, William and William Stephen, ii. 385
  ―――― of Cowdray castle, Sussex, William Stephen, iii. 231.――Family,
    ii. 354
  Pradannack manor, iii. 258, 259
  Praed, i. 346, 349. James 349, 350.――Family, ii. 241. Humphrey
    Mackworth, M.P. 264. His act for improving the fisheries at St.
    Ives 264.――Arabella and Catherine, iii. 10. Rev. Herbert 9. James
    and his marriage 11. Julia and Mary 10. William 9, 10. Character,
    marriage, &c. 10. Death 11. Colonel 8. Mr. 7, 8. His liberality 7.
    Mr. singular story of, and his death 9. Family, account of 8.
    Remark on 11. Name 9
  Praed, of Trevethew, Florence and James, i. 357.――H. M., iii. 9
    _ter._, 54, 93, 239. His character 9. Improved Trevethow and the
    plantations of Cornwall 11. Improved a valley 59. Rev. Herbert of
    Ludgvan, his son 54. James 444. Mary 239 _bis_. Miss 444. Mr. 85
    _bis_.――Mr. iv. 58. Family 54
  Prake, Mr. 110 years old, iv. 24
  Pratt, Mr. i. 283
  Preaching monks, i. 310
  Precays, i. 417
  Presbyterians, iv. 73.――Their rupture with Mr. Stephens, ii. 270
  Prest, Agnes, her history, i. 108. Place of her martyrdom 111
  Prestwood family, ii. 91. Thomas 196
  Pretender’s army defeated at Preston, ii. 112
  Prewbody, ii. 337
  Priam, iii. 418 _ter._, 420
  Price, Piercy, i. 275.――Winifred, ii. 93.――John, iii. 86 _bis_, 86,
    87, 289 _bis_. Found a ring, and erected a monument in memory of it
    289, 290. Rose 289. Sir Rose 85, 86. Story of 87. Lady 86. Mr. was
    of the expedition to Jamaica 85
  ―――― of Trewardreva, Thomas, ii. 93
  Prideaux, in Luxilian, the Hearles settled at, ii. 99
  ―――― castle, iii. 56
  ―――― i. 74, 76, 117, 266, 289 _bis_, 294, 299, 349, 385. Adiston
    160. Edmund 399. Matthew 349. William 160.――Dean, ii. 78. His
    “Connections” and remarks upon 76.――Notice of him, iii. 278. His
    house 281. Edmund 278. Family 238. Possess part of the tithes of
    Padstow 280
  ―――― of Boswithgye, Peter, i. 43
  ―――― of Devon, Sir Edmund, i. 259
  ―――― of Fewborough, i. 17――ii. 335
  ―――― of Gunlyn, i. 243, 244
  ―――― of Netherton, Devon, Sir Edmund, and arms, ii. 242.――Sir John,
    iii. 278. Family 237――iv. 137
  Prideaux of Orchardton, Sir John, i. 346, 347
  ―――― of Padstow, i. 172.――Had a staircase from Stowe, ii. 351.――Rev.
    Charles, iii. 279. Edmund 3. Nicholas, his character, built his
    house at Padstow 279. Mr. 56. Family, and arms 279. Monuments 280
  ―――― of Plase house, Edward, i. 17
  ―――― of Prideaux, Roger, Thomas, _bis_, family, and arms, iii. 56
  ―――― manor, iii. 57 _bis_. Account of 56
  Prince’s “Worthies of Devon,” i. 144, 346, 348――ii. 61――iii. 184,
    222――iv. 15
  Prince of Wales, iii. 222
  Prior park, i. 57, 58.――A house at Truro built of stone from, ii. 33
  Prior’s cross, i. 368
  Priory of Bodmin, i. 73. Its dissolution, and value of its revenues 74
  Prisk, i. 237
  Probus church, iii. 180――iv. 135
  ―――― and Grace Fair, iii. 364
  ―――― parish, iii. 180, 182, 188, 243, 269, 448, 450, 451――iv. 156;
    or St. Probus, ii. 2, 305, 353 _bis_
  PROBUS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, impropriation, patron, impropriator, incumbent,
    manor of Moresk, Trehane, iii. 354. Carvean, Trewother, manor of
    Trelowthes, Trewithgy, Trevorva 355. Proverb upon it, Trewithan,
    manor of Wolveden or Golden 356. Ruin of the Tregians, Camden’s
    mention of it 357. Tonkin descended from them, list of their
    forfeited estates 358. The place where Cuthbert Mayne was found is
    still shewn, Tregian twenty years in prison, his son suffered a
    second loss of property 360. In consequence of the gunpowder plot,
    retired to Spain, the Marquis of St. Angelo, Talbot, Tredenham
    361. Curvoza 362. By the Editor, church and monuments, Mr. Thomas
    Hawkins introduced inoculation into Cornwall, church tower ibid.
    Compared with others, church was collegiate, a fair, Prince
    Charles visited most gentlemen in the west of Cornwall, Mr.
    Williams went up to congratulate the King on his Restoration 363.
    Name of the fair, the saints Probus and Grace, skeletons found in
    the chancel wall, Whitaker’s memoranda, parish feast, etymology of
    Carvean 364. Of Trewithgy, Trenowith, and Treworgy, manor of
    Probus, fortification in Golden 365. Supposed by Whitaker to be a
    Roman camp, Caer Voza, a British. Trehane, the two Dr. Stackhouses
    366. Trewithan, its beauty, Mr. Williams fond of ringing bells,
    peal at Kenwyn church for the amusement of the inhabitants of
    Truro 367. Hawkins family, persecution of Mr. Tregion, more
    victims to religious opinions suffered under Elizabeth than Mary
    368. Tregion’s connections, and especially his wealth incitements
    to his ruin, his own imprudence the ultimate means 369. Editor’s
    remarks on the transaction, and on the tyranny of the Tudor
    monarchs, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 370.
    Interesting varieties of rock formerly to be seen on the road to
    Grampound, the road now turned 371
  Probus town, i. 242 _bis_, 251, 294, 393, 420. Tower at 48
  ―――― St. and his skeleton, iii. 364
  ―――― St. vicarage, iii. 182. The vicar 181 _quat._, 189
  ―――― Groguth, iii. 354
  Proclamation for the apprehension of Rogers and Street, i. 279
  Prophets, ii. 65
  Prospect, Cornish word for, ii. 200
  Protestants persecuted in Germany, iii. 67
  Prothasius, St. i. 99
  Prouse, ii. 54.――Digory, iii. 358
  Prout, arms, iii. 66
  Prowse, Mrs. Elizabeth, i. 8
  Pryce, Dr. William, iii. 323 _bis_.――His Archæologia Cornu
    Britannica, ii. 255――iii. 390. His Mineralogia Cornubiensis ibid.
    His Vocabulary 362
  Prye, William, i. 215
  Prynne’s records, i. 251
  Psalms, book of, iii. 262
  Psoralia aculeata, iv. 182
  ―――― pinnata, iv. 182
  ―――― spicata, iv. 182
  Ptolemy, i. 256――ii. 172, 199.――The Geographer, iii. 24 _bis_, 25
    _bis_, 395――iv. 39. His geography 8
  Puddicombe, Rev. S. ii. 397.――Rev. Stephen of Morval, iii. 253
  Puntner, harbour at, i. 48
  Purification, feast of, iii. 324
  Putta, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Pyder hundred, i. 115, 212, 404――ii. 89
  Pyderick, Little, parish, i. 212
  Pye, i. 62.――Family, line upon, and arms, iii. 449
  Pylos, ii. 368
  Pyn, Herbert de, iii. 117
  Pyne family, iii. 117
  Pynnock, St. parish, i. 112――ii. 291
  Pyrenees, iv. 159
  Pyrrhus’s saying after a hard earned victory, ii. 342

  Quaker’s meeting, ii. 35
  Quakers, iv. 73
  Quaram, Rev. Mr. rector of Falmouth, iv. 72
  Quarm, Rev. Mr. ii. 4
  Quarme, Robert and Walter, i. 422. Arms ibid.
  ―――― of Creed, Robert, i. 236
  ―――― of Nancar, Rev. Walter, i. 256. Arms ibid.
  Quarrier in Leskeard, iii. 21
  Queen’s college, Oxford, ii. 139, 239
  Question, Mr. iv. 118
  Quethiock parish, i. 409――ii. 361
  QUETHIOCK parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    iii. 371. Impropriation, value of benefice, patron, and incumbent
    372. By the Editor, ancient name, Trehunsey manor, Trehunest
    village, antiquity of the church, monuments, appropriation of
    tithes, once a college, its foundation deed printed ibid. The
    rector, now its sole representative, a former chapel, statistics,
    vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 373
  Quick, Anthony, James, John, iv. 55
  Quincy, Rev. S., i. 366
  Quiril, Peter, Bishop of Exeter, i. 300――ii. 412

  Radcliffe observatory, S. P. Rigand, director of, ii. 376
  Raddon, Richard de, ii. 427
  Raddona, Richard de, iv. 77, 82
  Radford, Nicholas, iii. 350
  Radnor, Earl of, i. 383――iii. 170.――Robarts, Earl of, ii. 377, 380.
    John 379, 380. Arms 380.――Last earl, iii. 193. Henry 381
  Raile, John, iii. 387
  Railway, i. 48.――Railways in Redruth, iii. 390
  Rainton rectory, i. 130
  Raith and Raithow, etymology of, ii. 394
  Ralegh, Piers de, Walter de, iii. 269
  Raleigh, Sir Walter, i. 390――ii. 7, 21, 56, 342
  Ralph, i. 344. John 352 _bis_. Rev. John 351, 352, 366. Loveday 352
    _bis_. Mary 352.――John, iii. 2
  Ram or Rame head, i. 343――ii. 106――iv. 32.――Description of, iii. 375
  Rame, Joanna de, iii. 374 _bis_, 438 _bis_. Arms 374
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 374, 375
  ―――― parish, iii. 101, 108, 110
  RAME parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, a
    rectory, value, patron, incumbent, manor of Rame, iii. 374. By the
    Editor, church peculiarly situated, monuments, manor and barton of
    Rame, Rame head, its appearance, and that of the Lizard, St.
    Michael’s chapel, description of the head, boundary of Plymouth
    harbour, its latitude and longitude, and establishment of the port,
    Edystone lighthouse 375. Its latitude and longitude, former danger
    of the rocks, description of the first lighthouse, remarkable storm,
    lighthouse disappeared, improved construction of the second 376.
    Generosity of Louis XIV. fire, terrible accident 377. Erection of
    the third lighthouse, Bond’s description 378. Inscription, Cawsand
    village, and bay, statistics, rector, and patron 379. Geology by Dr.
    Boase 380
  Rame place, iii. 375
  Randall, Thomas, steward of Helston, ii. 160
  Randill, Jonathan, iii. 260
  Randolph of Withiel, iv. 161
  Randyl family, and arms, ii. 353
  ―――― of Tregenno, Richard, i. 421. His arms 421
  Raphel manor, ii. 400
  Rascow island, iv. 230
  Rashleigh, i. 43, 74, 106, 255. Charles, constructs Seaforth harbour
    47. Establishes fishery 48. Origin and history of the family, and
    arms 43.――Family, ii. 91, 294. Philip 295. Philip endowed a hospital
    at Fowey 43. Made a fortune by privateering 44. Purchased the manor
    of Fowey, his ancestors represented it in parliament 46. Philip, a
    zealous naturalist, has published two volumes 47. William 46, 91,
    92. Mr. 397.――Miss, iii. 443. Family 57.――Jonathan, iv. 101. Philip
    140. Mr. 114. Family 99 _bis_, 131, 137 _bis_
  Rashleigh of Disporth, Charles, i. 260, 423
  ―――― of Menabelly, Rachel, i. 257, 259――William, ii. 294, 295. Mr.
    400.――William, iii. 290. Miss 367. Mr. 88. Family 57.――Jonathan and
    Jonathan, ii. 107. Jonathan and his son ibid. Jonathan 109. Rev.
    Jonathan 108. John and John 107. Philip 109. Philip, collector of
    Cornish minerals, has published specimens, constructed a curious
    grotto, his marriage and death 108. William 108, 109 _ter._ Family
    107, 109. One of them sitting in almost every parliament of George
    II. and III. 107
  ―――― of Penquite, Coleman and John, iii. 57
  ―――― house in Ranelagh parish, Devon, iv. 101
  Rat island, iv. 230, 266
  Ratcliffe of Franklyn, Devon, Joshua and his daughter, iii. 76
  Ravenna in Italy, ii. 75 _bis_
  Ravenscroft of Cheshire, arms, i. 374
  Rawe, R. J., iii. 387
  ―――― of Pennant, John, i. 383
  Rawle, i. 263――ii. 274. Mr. 273
  Rawlegh’s “Relicta Nomen Viri,” iv. 155
  Rawlinge, Mr. iii. 82
  Rawlings, Thomas, built a house, and William, notice of, iii.
    280.――Thomas, iv. 143
  ―――― of Padstow, Thomas, i. 235, 310.――Thomas, ii. 256.――Rev.
    William, iii. 282. Mr. 178
  Rawlins, Rev. William, jun., ii. 273
  Rawlinson, Mary, and T. H. of Lancaster, iii. 137
  Rawlyn, John, iii. 358
  Ray, the botanist, iii. 173
  Raynwood, John, iii. 211
  Reading, iii. 10
  Rebellion, story of the great, i. 44. History of Flammock’s 86
  Red Cross street, London, iv. 86
  Red sea, place of banishment for exorcised spirits, iii. 48
  Redevers, Earl Baldwin de, ii. 427
  Redgate, i. 179 _bis_. 180 _bis_
  Redinge, i. 206
  Rediver mills, iv. 47
  Redman, Richard, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 189――iii. 147
  Redruth manor, possessors of, iii. 381
  ―――― parish, i. 160, 208, 238, 239――ii. 129, 239 _bis_, 272,
    284――iii. 5, 7――iv. 5
  REDRUTH parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, a rectory, value, patron, iii. 380. Manor, town, Carew
    brief in Penwith hundred, town now considerable, large corn market,
    had two weekly markets in the reign of Edward III., proceeding of
    Mr. Buller, town chiefly one street 381. Old chapel, landed
    proprietors, manors of Treruff and Tollgus 382. Treleigh manor,
    Tonkin’s tribute to Mr. Pollard, Park Erisey, the barton of Treleigh
    produces tin and copper, the owner imposed upon 383. Plain an Guary,
    church beyond the town, glebe, value of benefice 384. By the Editor,
    situation and description of church, St. Uny, advowson, new chapel,
    Tavistock abbey ibid. Life of St. Rumon, by Leland and Butler,
    etymological conjecture, copper works and slate, handsome shops, and
    good market, quantity of shoes, &c. brought from Penzance 385.
    Market much crowded, new market place, Lord Dunstanville’s clock and
    bell tower, village of Plengwary, Amphitheatre adjacent to,
    etymology, the village called Little Redruth, parish muster book
    386. Great scarcity in 1697, the Flammock insurrection, manor and
    honor of Tehidy, Cornish, Saxon and Norman acre, difference
    between the common and statute acre 388. Extent of Tehidy, notice of
    Lord Dunstanville’s death, meetings to commemorate his virtues,
    monument to be erected on Cambre 389. Landed proprietors, Dr. Pryce,
    railways from Portreath harbour, statistics, incumbent, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, important mining district 390
  Redruth town, iii. 381. Road to Marazion from 308.――From Truro, ii. 304
  ―――― Little, village, iii. 386
  Reed, Thomas, iv. 3, 4 _bis_. His ancestors 4
  Reenwartha, iii. 328. Account of 326
  Reenwollas, iii. 327 _bis_
  Refishoc manor, iii. 195, 196
  Reform Act, i. 391――iii. 29.――Change produced by, i. 390.――Remarks
    on, iii. 272
  Reformation, iii. 264, 279, 363
  Refry, Henry, iii. 387
  Regent street, iii. 205
  Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, ii. 427 _ter._, 428
  Regulus an abbot, iv. 105
  Reid, i. 259
  Rekellythye, iii. 324
  Relics of antiquity dug up near Camelford, ii. 402, 403
  Religious ceremonies of the Britons, i. 193
  Relistion mine, ii. 144
  Remfry, Henry, iii. 383. Richard 382
  Renaudin, David, John, family, and arms, iii. 303
  ―――― of Arworthal, David, iii. 225 _bis_
  Rendall of Lostwithiel, Elizabeth and Walter, iii. 328
  ―――― of Pelynt, family, iii. 328
  Renfry, Sondry and Thomas, iii. 387
  Rennie, John, the engineer, iii. 378
  Renphry, his son, sold Trewithan, iv. 140
  Reperend Brygge, iv. 255
  Reschell, iii. 111
  Rescorla, i. 49
  Reskimer, by Leland, iv. 270
  ―――― iii. 169.――Heir of, iv. 156
  Reskymer, account of, iii. 133
  ―――― family, ii. 358――iii. 126, 135, 423.――Arms, iv. 96
  ―――― of Reskymer, John, iii. 133. Sir John 133, 147. John and four
    daughters, Richard, Roger and arms 133. Mr. 147 _bis_
  Resogan, Bennet, and John, sen. iii. 325. John, jun., 325, 326
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 325
  Resparva, i. 386
  Respiration, Dr. Mayne upon, iii. 250
  Restoration, iii. 73
  Restormal, iii. 28
  Restormalle castle, iv. 229
  Restormel, i. 338――iv. 81. By Leland 277
  ―――― castle, ii. 38.――Account of 392
  ―――― hill, ii. 393
  ―――― house, ii. 393
  Restowrick, i. 310
  Restrongar creek, ii. 24
  ―――― passage, ii. 17
  Restonget creek, iii. 224
  ―――― manor, iii. 230, 231. Account of 226
  ―――― passage, iii. 226
  ―――― village, iii. 226
  Resurra in St. Minver, ii. 336
  Resurrans, i. 214. 215 _bis_
  Retallock, iii. 143
  ―――― barrow, account of, i. 220
  Retollock of Trewerre, i. 391
  Revell, Richard, ii. 180
  Revenge, man of war, destroyed in a glorious victory, ii. 342, 344
  Rewley abbey, ii. 138, 139.――Near Oxford, iv. 4 _bis_. Edmund Earl
    of Cornwall’s charter to 4
  Reynolds, i. 61 _ter._, 85. Admiral Carthew, his death 205.――Sir
    Joshua, ii. 306. Admiral, lost at sea 389. Mr. 241. Family 142.――Mr.
    iii. 354
  Rhé, isle of, iii. 183
  Rheese, ii. 173
  Rhodes, Rev. George, i. 354.――Miss, ii. 227. Family 100
  ―――― isle of, i. 411
  Rhys ap Tudor, iv. 8
  Rialobran, iii. 80
  Rialton, Godolphin Lord, i. 123, 126, 234
  Rice, i. 237
  Rich, Lady Lucy, and Robert Earl of Warwick, ii. 379
  Richan, iii. 402
  Richard, Duke of Gloucester, made sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 185
  ―――― 1st, King, i. 54――ii. 118, 177 _bis_, 178, 180 _quat._, 341,
    409――iii. 27 _bis_, 78, 132, 202, 393――iv. 71, 100 _bis_, 102 _bis_,
    112.――Cœur de Lion, i. 254――ii. 249――iii. 7.――Taken prisoner, ii.
    178. Ransomed, returned home, raised an army, and defeated John 179
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 59, 62, 93, 176, 181, 294, 341, 394, 422, 431――iii. 27
    _bis_, 60, 65, 111, 129 _bis_, 148, 269, 303, 436――iv. 22, 36, 99, 101
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 43, 108 _bis_, 115, 185, 231――iii. 101, 102 _ter._,
    142, 184, 203, 393. Slain at the battle of Bosworth 108 _bis_, 185
  ―――― King of the Romans, i. 36, 253, 414――ii. 109, 211 _bis_, 392,
    403――iii. 448――iv. 4 _ter._――Earl of Cornwall, ii. 8, 156――iii. 15,
    19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448. Notice of 28. Arms 169
  ―――― St. King of the West Saxons, and his death, iv. 126
  ―――― of Shrewsbury, ii. 186, 187 _bis_
  Richardia, Æthiopica, iv. 182
  Richards, William, iii. 153
  Richardson, i. 383
  Richmond, Earl of, ii. 108 _bis_――iii. 101, 102. Edmund of Hadham 65
  Ridgeway, Earl of Londonderry, i. 69.――John, ii. 70
  Rigaud, S. P., ii. 376
  Rillaton manor, iv. 7
  Rimo, ii. 50
  Rinden, i. 117
  Ringwood of Bradock, Miss, iv. 139
  Risdon’s History of Devon, i. 133.――Manuscript, ii. 341
  Risdon of Babeleigh Giles, iv. 157
  ―――― of Badleigh, Giles, i. 223
  Rist church, i. 148
  Rivers in Cornwall, list of, iv. 223. Their sources 237
  Rivers, Thomas, i. 177
  ―――― Richard Woodvill, Earl of, i. 194
  Riviere, iii. 342 _ter._
  Roach, in France, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Roach parish, i. 41, 212, 218, 310――ii. 1, 93――iii. 195, 442,
    448――iv. 137, 160
  ROACH or Roche, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, antiquity of the parish and town, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient chapel, iii. 391. Description
    of its remains, a pool supposed to ebb and flow 392. The story
    from whence its name of St. Gundred’s well is derived, Treroach or
    Tregarreck, Tremoderet en Hell, ruins of Holywell 393. Hains
    Burrow, Avoh Bicken, every parish in Cornwall formerly had a
    beacon, Colefreth, ruins of a chapel at, well near Pentavale
    Fenton 394. Etymology 395. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    saint, his history ibid. Parish named before he was born, a
    rectory, its value, patron, incumbent, society for purchasing
    advowsons, Tregarick manor, etymology 396. By Whitaker on the
    name, hermitage in the rock 397. By the Editor, the rock and tower
    conspicuous, Lysons says the cell was dedicated to St. Michael,
    Mr. Whitaker draws on his fancy 398. Lysons’s view and description
    of the hermitage, incumbents 399. Observations on the society for
    purchasing advowsons, parish could not be dedicated to St. Roche,
    history of St. Roche, his miraculous cure from the plague 400.
    Pimples called after him, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology
    by Dr. Boase, the rock compared with St. Mewan beacon 401
  ―――― rock, i. 189――ii. 283――iii. 265
  ―――― St. church tower, ii. 386
  ―――― St. curacy, ii. 389
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 384
  Road, Truro, i. 227
  Roadstead near St. Ives, ii. 260
  Robartes, i. 384. Lady Essex 378, 379. Seized with small pox a month
    after her marriage 379. Francis 297. Henry Earl of Radnor 293. John
    Earl of Radnor 19, 297, 378, 279. Lord 113, 116. Sir Richard
    293――ii. 9.――Family, iii. 258.――John, ancestor of Charles Bodville,
    Earl of Radnor, John mayor of Truro, iv. 73. John Lord, Baron of
    Truro 74. Lord 161, 185, 187. Family acquired great wealth at Truro,
    engaged in mercantile pursuits there for three generations, rose to
    eminence and acquired the earldom of Radnor temp. James 1st 88
  Robarts, i. 74.――Frances, ii. 379. Francis, Henry and John, origin
    of the family 381.――Family, iii. 57.――Robert, Viscount Bodmin, ii.
    379 _bis_. Esteemed by Charles 2nd 380. John Lord Robarts Earl of
    Falmouth, afterwards Earl of Radnor 379, 380, 382. Earl of Radnor
    377. Charles Bodville 2nd Earl 380. Henry 3rd Earl 380, 381. John
    1st Earl 379, 380, 381, 382. John 4th Earl 381. Richard Lord Truro
    380, 383. His arms 380
  ―――― of Lanhidiock family, iii. 193, 197
  ―――― of Truro, Richard, iii. 234. Family 348
  Roben, John, iii. 387
  Robert, son of Ankitil, ii. 427
  ―――― Duke of Normandy, iii. 462
  ―――― son of William the Conqueror, ii. 211 _bis_
  Roberts, Sir Richard, i. 19 _bis_.――Richard, ii. 375. Family 170,
    397.――Francis, iii. 170. Family 178
  ―――― of Coran, Hon. John, i. 419
  ―――― of Truro, ii. 93
  Robins, i. 53――ii. 151.――John, iii. 260.――Benjamin, his Mathematical
    Works, iv. 10. Stephen and Miss 156. Family 162
  ―――― of Penryn, James and Thomasine, iii. 134
  ―――― of Tregenno, i. 421. Stephen 421
  ―――― Verian family, John, iv. 116. Arms 117
  Robinson, i. 302. George 303.――Family, ii. 217, 358. George 358.
    William 160 _bis_.――George and his heirs, iii. 419. P. V. 419, 424.
    Rev. William of Ruan Major 419. Miss 75. Mr. 419, 421, 424. Family 423
  ―――― of Cadgwith, George Thomas, his melancholy death, iii. 421.
    Arms 422
  ―――― of Nanceloe, or Nansloe, ii. 139. Rev. William ibid.――iii. 419
  ―――― of Treveneage, Mr. killed by a bull, ii. 221
  Robyns, Mr. iii. 88
  Roche, St. iii. 395, 397, 398――iv. 139.――His history by Hals, iii.
    395, 400. By Editor 400. His death, ib. Supposed to preside over
    certain complaints 401
  Roche parish, iii. 55, 450
  Rochelle, iii. 183
  Rochester, St. Just, Bishop of, ii. 282, 287.――St. Justus and St.
    Paulinus, Bishops of, iii. 284
  Rock, story of one turning round, i. 187
  ―――― ferry in St. Minver, iii. 275, 282, 283
  ―――― island, ii. 1
  Rocks near Land’s End dangerous, iii. 430
  Rodd family, ii. 228, 229. Miss 227. Mr. 134.――Mr. iii. 8
  ―――― of Herefordshire, Capt. Francis, ii. 228
  ―――― of Trebartha, Rev. Edward, ii. 228. Edward, D.D. 281. Col.
    Francis 228. F. H. ib. _bis_, 229. Jane, Adm. Sir J. T. and Harriet
    228. Mr. 99
  ―――― of Trebather, Francis, i. 359. Francis Hearle 360
  Rodda, Miss, ii. 82
  Roderick, King of Wales and Cornwall, iii. 80
  Rodolph 2nd Emperor of Germany, ii. 371
  Rogate parish, Sussex, iii. 205, 206
  Rogers, Anne, i. 270 _ter._, 271, 274. Rev. Edward 242. John
    273.――Brian, iii. 76. Rev. John 137. Rev. John, Rector of Mawnan 77,
    445. His taste, &c., 445. Nicholas 387. Peter 76. Family 75. Arms 76
  ―――― of Antron, Captain John, iii. 445. Improved that place 446
  ―――― of Cannington family, iii. 76
  ―――― of Helston and Penrose, Hugh, John, and John, M.P. the latter
    added to his estates, iii. 445――Of Penrose, near Helston, i.
    228.――John, ii. 128, 243. Mr. 117.――John and Mrs. iii. 88
  ―――― of Skewis, i. 267. Henry 267, 284, 285, 286, 287 _bis_. His
    character 267. Turns his sister-in-law out from Skewis house,
    resists the Sheriff, several men killed 268. Escapes to Salisbury,
    taken, convicted, and executed 269. His trial for the murder of
    Carpenter 270. Defence 272. Trial for the murder of Woolston 274. Of
    Willis 276. Seen in prison 281. Print of him, with his history 282.
    Newspaper reports of the trial 283. His wife 271, 272, 273. His son
    280. Editor’s conversation with 280
  Rogers of Treasson, afterwards of Penrose, John, iii. 47. Rev. J.,
    54. Family 47
  Rogroci, and Lestriake in Germow and Brake, iii. 360
  Rollandus, i. 98
  Rolle, i. 151. Sir Henry 2.――Family, Robert, ii. 313. Samuel 313
    _ter._ Lord 87.――Dennis, iv. 136. Family 41
  ―――― of Stephenton, Henry, iv. 40.――Of Stevenston, John, ii.
    343.――Mr. iii. 117. Family 254
  Rolles family, iii. 117 _bis_
  Rollo, Duke of Normandy, ii. 344, 347
  Rolls family, ii. 416
  Roman army, i. 335
  ―――― calends, iii. 258
  ―――― camp, iii. 319――iv. 78
  ―――― Catholics, persecution of, iii. 368
  ―――― coins, iv. 30.――Found at Camelford, ii. 403
  ―――― Emperor; i. 195
  ―――― fort in Probus, iii. 365
  ―――― idols, iv. 101
  ―――― invasion, iii. 162
  ―――― legions, i. 335
  ―――― martyrology, iv. 96
  ―――― road, iii. 324――iv. 12; or way 15.――From Lincolnshire to Bath,
    and through Somersetshire to the west, iii. 324
  ―――― saturnalia, ii. 164
  ―――― territories in Gaul, i. 335 _bis_
  ―――― work at Berry park, iv. 31. On West Looe Down 29, 30, 31
  Romans, i. 256, 295, 334 _ter._, 335 _bis_――iii. 395.――Encamped in
    various parts of Cornwall, ii. 19. Their castles 423.――Directed
    their roads to the nearest and best fords, iv. 30
  ―――― Richard, King of the, i. 36, 253, 414――ii. 109, 211 _bis_, 392,
    403――iii. 285, 448――iv. 4 _ter._ and Earl of Cornwall, ii. 8,
    156――iii. 15, 19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448 _bis_
  Rome, i. 197 _quat._, 198 _bis_, 206, 334, 335, 393――ii. 369――iii.
    284, 331, 400, 431, 434 _bis_――iv. 126 _bis_, 146, 148. St. Gorian
    beheaded at 112. Indulgences from, for building Bideford bridge 341.
    Thomas Paleologus arrives at 368. Foreigners prohibited from living
    at 371. Greek college founded there 370, 371. Scotch college 371.
    Jubilee of 1601 at 371
  ―――― artists of, iv. 169
  ―――― church of, iii. 357, 368――iv. 165
  ―――― Emperor of, ii. 75
  ―――― St. John Lateran, church at, iv. 165
  ―――― Lateran, gate of, iv. 165
  ―――― papal, tower of, i. 312
  ―――― see of, iii. 150
  Romney, Kent, ii. 202, 210. A Cinque port 38
  ―――― marsh, iii. 10
  Romulus, i. 333
  Roofs, security for, iii. 243
  Roper, Edward, iii. 37. Elizabeth 140
  ―――― of St. Winow, iv. 156
  Roscarnon, ii. 24
  Roscarrack, account of, i. 384
  ―――― family, ii. 357
  ―――― of Roscarrack, i. 384. Charles, John, _bis_, and Richard 384
  ―――― burial place, i. 385
  Roscarrock, Mr. i. 214.――Thomas and Mr. iii. 314. Family 193, 240
  ―――― of Croan, i. 371
  Roscorla, account of, i. 44
  ―――― George de, i. 44 _bis_
  ―――― of Roscorla in St. Austell, William, iii. 188
  Roscrow in Mabe, iii. 125.――Account of, ii. 93, 98
  ―――― family, ii. 93
  ―――― of Penryn, Julian, i. 144, 145
  ―――― of Roscrow, i. 145.――Family and arms, ii. 337
  Roscruge family, and etymology of the name, i. 39
  Rose, no wild ones in the southern hemisphere, iii. 173
  Roseath manor, iv. 3
  Rosecadwell, possessors of, iii. 88
  Rosecorla, i. 420
  Rosecossa, account of, ii. 279
  ―――― Sir John, ii. 279
  Rosecradock, i. 196, 381.――In St. Clear, iii. 172
  Rosehill, iii. 88
  Rosemadons, i. 145
  Rosemodens, manor of, in Buryan, St. Hilary, Paul, and Guinear, iii. 360
  Rosemodris, i. 150
  Rosemorron, account of, ii. 124
  Rosemullion head, iii. 177
  Rosesilian, ii. 398
  Roseteague, ii. 56, 57
  Roseundle, account of, i. 44
  Rosevithney, account of, iii. 47
  Roseworth, account of, ii. 317
  Rosillian, i. 53, 54
  Roskuroh, account of, i. 383
  Roskymer family, ii. 128
  Rosland, ii. 50 _bis_
  Rosmeran, i. 136
  Rosminver, iii. 237
  Rosmodrevy, i. 141 _bis_
  Rosogan, James and John, ii. 192――John, iii. 333
  ―――― of St. Stephens, Elizabeth, i. 400. John 399 _ter._ Arms 400
  Ross, Dr. John, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 224――iii. 300.――Solomon de,
    ii. 336
  Rosswick manor, ii. 358
  Rosteage, account of by Hals, ii. 54. By Tonkin 56
  Roswarne, i. 162, 164
  ―――― De, i. 162 _bis_
  Rother, Jane, i. 357
  Rouen, Archbishop of, appointed Regent by Richard 1st, ii. 178
  Rough Tor, i. 131, 132, 201, 307, 310
  Round table, ii. 308
  Rous, Sir Anthony, Recorder of Launceston, ii. 423.――John, iv. 145
  ―――― of Halton, Anthony, i. 313 _bis_. Francis 315. Arms 313
  Rouse, Henry, i. 215.――Captain, Governor of St. Mawe’s castle for
    Cromwell, ii. 277. Lines upon him 278. Robert of Wootton converted
    part of a barn at St. Mawe’s castle into a Presbyterian
    meeting-house, his marriage 278
  Rovier, iii. 342
  Rowe, Rev. John, ii. 432. Rev. William 252. Mr. 139, 157.――Family,
    iii. 215 _bis_, 239
  Rowle, Roger, iii. 185. William 386
  Royal society, iii. 52, 53, 378
  Royalists concealed in a vault, i. 143
  Ruan castle, account of, iii. 403
  ―――― St. iii. 419
  ―――― Lanihorne manor belonged to the Archdekne family, iv. 121
  ―――― or Lanyhorne parish, i. 294――ii. 2, 356――iii. 40, 385――iv. 115,
    117 _bis_, 121
  RUAN LANIHORNE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, value of benefice, iii. 402. Patron, incumbent, land
    tax, Tregago, its etymology 403. By Tonkin, situation and
    boundaries, value of benefice, Lanyhorne castle ibid. Situation and
    description of it, pulled down, turned into a little town, trade by
    shipping 404. A rectory, value, patron, two incumbents 405. By the
    Editor, situation of the church, the creek stopped up, the castle,
    Arcedekne family ibid. Manors of Lanihorne and Elerchy, Treviles,
    Mr. Whitaker’s account of this parish, memoir of him, his death 406.
    Memorial, Editor’s character of him, and of his writings, his
    defence of Mary Queen of Scots 407. His error respecting the ancient
    cathedral of Cornwall, has printed two volumes on the subject,
    containing invective against Dr. Borlase and others, extracts made
    by Mr. Forschall from a MS. in the British Museum, description of
    the volume 408. The extracts in Saxon 409. List of the Bishops of
    Cornwall and of Devonshire 415. See tranferred to Exeter, reason of
    Edward the elder for endowing the Bishoprick of Crediton,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 416
  Ruan Major, or St. Ruan Major parish, ii. 116, 358――iii. 128, 257,
    385, 421, 423 _bis_. Rectory 258
  RUAN MAJOR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, barton of Erisey,
    iii. 16. Family, story of Mrs. Erisey leaving her husband and taking
    her daughter with her, his distress compared with Hector’s on
    parting with Andromache 417. Translation of Hector’s address to
    Andromache, Hals’s deduction from it of Homer’s and Hector’s opinion
    upon marriage, dexterity of another, Mr. Erisey admired by James
    1st, who objected to his name 418. Parish existing before Wolsey’s
    Inquisition, value, patron, land tax 419. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent. By the
    Editor, family, and barton of Erisey, advowson ibid. Hals’s specimen
    of Homer, the same passage from Pope, statistics, incumbent, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 420
  Ruan Minor parish, ii. 116, 319, 358――iii. 128, 385, 416, 419
  RUAN MINOR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, patron,
    incumbent, Cadgwith, Mr. Robinson’s encounter with a bull, iii. 421.
    He died in three or four days, opinions of his neighbours, our
    Saviour’s judgment, Meneage comprehended in Lizard, etymology of
    Lizard and the dangerous nature of the coast 422. By Tonkin,
    boundaries, patron, incumbent, value 423. By the Editor, Cadgwith
    cove, succession of property in the parish ibid. Singular claim
    belonging to the rector, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase, Geology of the Lizard district in the “Transactions of
    the Cornish Geological Society” 424
  Rudall, Rev. Edward, i. 111
  Rudyard, John, built the 2nd lighthouse at Eddystone, iii. 376, 377, 378
  Ruffo, Roger, iv. 27
  Rugeham, iii. 350
  Rume parish, ii. 252
  Rumor, St. iii. 384 _bis_, 459. His life 385
  Runawartha, iii. 326
  Rundle, i. 136
  Rupe de, or Roach, Ralph, iii. 393. Family 391, 392, 393
  Rupert, Prince, arrived in Cornwall, and accompanied the King, iv. 186
  Rupibus, Peter de, i. 130
  Rushes, planted as a fence against the sand, ii. 150
  Russell, John, Lord, i. 301.――Lost an eye at the siege of Montrueil,
    sent to oppose the Cornish rebels, iii. 196. Meets them 197. Rev.
    John 275. Mr. 11
  ―――― of Exeter, Mr. made a fortune by the Lisbon trade, ii. 19
  Ruthes chapel, i. 218
  Ruthven, governor of Plymouth, i. 113
  Rutland, ii. 89
  ―――― Henry, Earl of, i. 9
  Ruydacus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Ryalton manor, i. 209, 234, 246, 250――iv. 138, 139. Account of 231
  Ryalton mansion house, i. 74, 233
  Rycaut’s history, ii. 368
  Rye, Naval armaments defeated by Fowey, ii. 45
  Rysbank, i. 169
  Ryvier castle, by Leland, iv. 265

  Sabina Popeia, i. 329
  Saccombe of Trewinnow, i. 257
  Sadler, Captain, i. 270
  Saigar, iii. 331
  St. Alban’s, battle of, iii. 294
  St. Asaph, William Lloyd, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Saint Aubyn. _See Seynt Aubyn_
  St. Barbe, Francis, iii. 224
  St. Clare, Sophia, a novel, iii. 34
  St. George, Clarence and Sir Richard, iii. 61
  St. John family, iii. 270
  St. Martin, Aldred de, iv. 77, 83
  St. Maur, William, ii. 189
  St. Pierre, Eustace, ii. 158
  Saints, Sieur D. T.’s Book of, i. 214
  Salamanca university, i. 311
  Salamis, iii. 216
  Salem in America, iii. 72 _ter._
  Salian Way, i. 393
  Salisbury, rebels march through, i. 87. Henry Rogers escapes to, and
    is there apprehended 269, 282
  ―――― Bishop of, John Coldwell, ii. 7. Lionel Woodvill 194
  ―――― Earl of, i. 168.――Cecil, ii. 66. Robert Cecil 213. Montacute
    91. Nevill, Richard 182. Plantagenet, Margaret, Countess 91
  ―――― plain, a nucleus of three chalky ridges, iii. 10
  Salmatius, i. 192
  Salmenica, castle of, ii. 368
  Salmon of the Alan and Val, i. 74
  Salmon, John, ii. 192
  ――――’s Survey of England, iv. 8
  Saltash, the Tamara of the Britons, iv. 40
  ―――― borough, John Lemon, M.P. for, iii. 229
  ―――― passage, iv. 185, 188
  ―――― river, i. 32
  ―――― town, i. 77, 103, 113, 203――ii. 59, 76, 79, 254――iii. 110, 380
  Salter, George, iii. 350. William of Devonshire 211, 215
  Salterne of Penheale, i. 379
  Saltren, John. iii. 276 _bis_
  Salvia cardinalis, iv. 182
  ―――― grahami, iv. 182
  ―――― involucrata, iv. 182
  Sammes’s Britannia, i. 120
  Sampford Courtenay, i. 170
  Sampson, the Jewish Hercules, iii. 280
  ―――― the younger, Archbishop of Dole, iii. 336
  ―――― Benjamin, his gunpowder manufactory and elegant residence, iii.
    305. Martin 16
  ―――― island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  ―――― St. ii. 231. Hals’s uninteresting history of, Giant church
    dedicated to 90.――His history, iii. 281
  ―――― St. chapel, Padstow, iii. 280
  SAMPSON’S, St. or Glant parish, ii. 89 _bis_, 90 _bis_, _see Glant_
  ―――― St. de South-hill church, ii. 231
  San or Saint explained, iv. 312
  Sancred, or Sancreed parish, iii. 242,  283
  ―――― St. iii. 425
  SANCREED parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, land tax, rich lodes of tin, iii. 425. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, name ibid. A vicarage, value, patron 426. By
    the Editor, church and monuments, one to Mrs. Bird, memoir of her,
    impropriation and patronage, consecrated well, St. Euny’s chapel,
    Hals’s dissertation on Creeds ibid. Pronounced Sancrist, Drift,
    Tregonnebris, late vicar, statistics, present vicar, patron, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 427
  Sancrit, iii. 78
  Sancroft, William, Archbishop of Canterbury, committed to the tower,
    iii. 296, 299
  Sanctuary manor, iv. 17
  Sand, inundated great part of Cornwall, ii. 149. Difficulty of
    burning the calcareous to lime 150.――Encroachments of, iii. 340.
    Confined by roots of plants 344.――Important for manure, iv. 17
  ―――― place, iii. 252
  Sandal, John, i. 251
  Sander’s land, i. 187
  Sanders, Mr. iv. 74
  Sandford, i. 317
  Sandhill, account of, i. 158
  Sands, John, i. 24.――Lord, and Hester his daughter, iii. 145
  Sandwich, i. 169.――A Cinque port, ii. 38
  ―――― Edward Montagu, Earl of, iii. 104
  Sandys, Sir Edwin, Edwin Archbishop of York, arms, iii. 158.――Rev.
    William, tutor to Lord de Dunstanville, ii. 244.――Rev. William, iii.
    10, 238, 239 _bis_, 240. Called the Cardinal, monument to 239.
    William 241
  ―――― of Hedbury, Worcestershire, Margaret and Sir William, iii. 158.
    William 158, 159. Sir William 158. Family 156. The Editor, their
    heir 159. Arms 158.――Edwyn, Lord, iv. 57
  ―――― of Helston, Mary, Mr. ii. 218.――Of St. Minver, Mr. iv. 104
  ―――― of Lanarth, Rev. Sampson, William, ii. 327
  ―――― of Ombersley, ii. 327
  ―――― of the Vine, Basingstoke, Hants, Edwin, iii. 159. Elizabeth
    158. Henry 157 _quat._, 158 _ter._, 158, 159. Hester 157 _ter._, 158
    _ter._, 159 _bis_. Margaret, William Lord 158.――Edwyn, Lord, raised
    a regiment of foot, and another of horse for Charles 1st, his death,
    iv. 58. William Lord 57 _bis_
  ―――― of the Vine peerage, petition for, iv. 58
  Saneret parish, ii. 282
  Sanns, John and Sampson, ii. 320
  Sans, word explained, iv. 317
  Santy, Edmund, iii. 324
  Saplyn, William, i. 215 _bis_
  Saracens, i. 414――ii. 37
  Sarah, i. 414
  Sargeaux of Court, family, ii. 394, 395. Alice 395 _bis_. Richard
    394 _ter._ Richard, jun. and Richard Sheriff of Cornwall 394. Sir
    Richard, ib. _ter._ Arms 395
  Sarum, borough, ii. 162.――Old, burgage tenures purchased by governor
    Pitt, and his election for, i. 68
  “Satyrs of Juvenal and Persius,” notes on, iv. 87
  Saunder’s hill, iii. 280
  Saviour’s, St. chapel, Padstow, iii. 281
  Sawah, iii. 33
  Sawle, Joseph, i. 43――iii. 200――Family, iv. 101
  ―――― of Penrice, Joseph and Mary, i. 222.――Mr. iii. 279
  Saxifraga sarmentosa, iv. 182
  Saxon camp, iv. 78
  ―――― Chronicle, ii. 403――iii. 310
  ―――― fort, iii. 322
  ―――― kings, tradition of seven dining together, ii. 284
  ―――― saint, iv. 125
  ―――― times, iii. 264
  ―――― victory at Camelford, iii. 322
  Saxons, i. 195, 305, 334 _quat._, 326, 337 _bis_, 338, 342 _bis_,
    404――ii. 127――iii. 284, 365 _bis_.――Landed at Perthsasnac, ii. 165.
    Their castles 423. Battle with the Britons 403.――Defeated by St.
    David, iii. 293.――Their settlement in Cornwall, iv. 125
  Say, William, Lord, ii. 379
  Sayer family, iii. 212, 215
  Scandinavians, i. 341――ii. 248
  Scawen, i. 392.――Family, ii. 67. Arms 68.――Thomas, iii. 318, 319.
    Sir William 268, 271, 317. Mr. 271, 355. William, his observations
    on the Cornish MS. Passio Christi, App. V. iv. 190. His dissertation
    on the Cornish tongue 193 to 221
  ―――― of Millinike, William, ii. 67
  Scawn, i. 20
  Schobells, ii. 281
  Sciffo, Phavorino and Hortulana, i. 175
  Scilly Islands or Isles, i. 139, 198, 199――ii. 213, 237, 283
    _ter._――iii. 429, 430 _bis_, 431, 433.――Governor and gunners
    pensioned, ii. 278. Sir John Grenville, governor 345. Lighthouse on
    St. Agnes 358.――Etymology, iii. 430 _bis_. Reduced by Athelstan 322.
    Garrison at 289.――List of, iv. 230
  SCILLY ISLANDS, by the Editor, unnoticed by Hals and Tonkin,
    frequented by the ancients for tin, called the ancient
    Cassiterides by mistake, fable of the Lioness country, exaggerated
    opinion of the ancients, Scilly isles mistaken by them for
    England, iv. 168. Monastery, grant to Tavistock abbey and its
    confirmation 169. A second 170. Letter from Edward 3rd, his camp
    in Enmoor, only two monks resident, agreement for their exchange
    for secular priests, tithes impropriated, St. Nicholas convent on
    Trescow island, remains visible, St. Nicholas the patron of
    mariners 171; and of infants, miracle working by his relics, the
    islands important in the Civil Wars, patriotism of the cavaliers,
    system of annual leasing injurious to the islands 172. Now let on
    lives with condition of improving the harbour, expectations formed
    from Mr. Smith, Lighthouse on St. Agnes, suggestion for one on the
    Wolf 173. Wrecks formerly much more frequent than now, loss of the
    Victory, Geology, rocks insignificant, no legendary history or
    peculiarity of manners, their names, speculations upon them 174.
    Vigilance in the customs, produce, resort of ships, Dr. Borlase on
    their druidical antiquities, population, improvement of police and
    justice 175. Appointment of magistrates, situation of St. Agnes
    lighthouse, high water 176
  Scipio Africanus, iii. 106.――His remark on the fall of Carthage, ii. 426
  Scobell, i. 45 _bis_, 46, 255. Barbara 259 _bis_. Francis 44, 417,
    418. Francis, M.P., 416. Mary 259. Richard 44, 259 _bis_. Arms
    44.――Francis, iii. 381. Mr. and family 88
  ―――― of Menagwins, Mary and Richard, i. 257.――In St. Austell, ii.
    217 _bis_
  ―――― of Rosillian, Henry, i. 53
  ―――― of St. Austell, i. 53
  Scobhall of Devon, arms, i. 44
  Scornier, account of, ii. 134
  Scotland, i. 336――iv. 75.――Union with, i. 126.――St. German travelled
    through and preached there, ii. 65. The Eliots originated from 66.
    The Duke of Braciano came to 371
  ―――― church of, iii. 300
  Scots, King, ii. 371
  ―――― wars, iv. 75
  Scott, Sir Walter, a quotation from, ii. 214. He has given
    popularity to the word foray 165
  Scottish tongue, iii. 114
  Scripture, Jewish, contains no reference to a future existence, book
    of Job excepted, iii. 69
  Scrope, Elizabeth and Sir Richard, ii. 185.――Richard and William,
    Lords of Bolton castle, iii. 129. Arms ibid. 130. Their contest with
    Carmynow for them 129
  Scrope and Grosvenor Roll, iii. 138
  Scylley Isles, by Leland, iv. 266, 285
  Sea trout, iii. 442
  Seaborn, Anne and Mr. of Bristol, ii. 270
  Seaford, relics at, iii. 33
  Seaforth, i. 47
  Searell, Allen, i. 2
  Searle family and arms, i. 37.――Mr. iv. 98
  Seaton river, iii. 118, 119
  Seawen, i. 397
  Sebaste, i. 52
  Sebert, King of the East Angles, ii. 284
  Seccombe of Pelsew, William, and arms, i. 417
  Sechell, Rev. Mr. of St. Just and Sancreed, iii. 427
  Segar, William, ii. 192
  Selborne, and its vicar, Mr. White, iii. 206
  Selby abbey, ii. 75
  Selybria in Greece, ii. 366
  Senan, St. an Irishman, his life by Dr. Butler, friend of St. David,
    founded a monastery, was a bishop, died the same day as St. David,
    notice of him, iii. 431. His day 431, and 434
  Senate of Rome, i. 334
  Seneca, iv. 87
  Seneschale family, ii. 139
  ―――― of Holland, Bernard, John de, and Luke, ii. 93
  Sennan, St. a Persian, exposed to wild beasts, and at last killed by
    gladiators, iii. 434
  ―――― St. parish, i. 198――ii. 282
  Sennen, Sennon or Sennor parish, i. 138, 139――iii. 30, 78
  SENNEN parish, or ST. SENNEN, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient name, value, land tax, painted images hid in the wall,
    inscription on font, iii. 428. Penros, Trevear, parish yields
    little wheat, but plenty of barley, Chapel Carne Braye 429.
    Dangerous rocks, spire thrown down, erected by the Romans, or by
    King Athelstan, and Marogeth Arvowed 430. Penryn-Penwid, Land’s
    End 431. By Tonkin, St. Sennan, daughter church to Burian. By the
    Editor, most western parish in England ibid. No granite on the
    cliff except near Land’s End, magnificent scene, Longships,
    light-house upon, communication interrupted sometimes for three
    months, latitude and longitude of Land’s End, church conspicuous,
    built of granite, monuments, inn 432. Its appropriate
    inscriptions, Mean village, tradition and prophecy attached to a
    flat rock here, Whitsand bay, things said to have landed here,
    parish fertile, variety of measures, difference of the mile in
    England and Ireland 433. English and Irish acre, history of St.
    Sennen, another St. Senan, his Life by Dr. Butler 434. Parish
    feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, sand in Whitsand bay,
    drifted as far as Sennen green 435
  Senns, i. 214
  Sepulchre of our Saviour, ii. 414
  Sereod, Sir Thomas, M.P. for Cornwall, iii. 165
  Sergeaulx, Sir Richard and his heirs, iii. 65.――Richard, iv. 21 and
    22. Sir Richard and three Misses 22. Family 21
  Sergiopolis, iv. 100
  Sergius, St. iv. 111. His history, the place of his martyrdom named
    Sergiopolis 100
  ―――― and Bacchus, Saints, Abbey at Angiers, iii. 232 _bis_――iv. 100, 105
  Sergreaulx, i. 264. Alice 262 _quat._ Richard 264. Sir Richard
    262.――Sir Richard, ii. 181. Family ibid. 182
  Serischall, Bartholomew, Margery and arms, iii. 225
  Seriseaux, Richard de, ii. 398
  ―――― arms, iii. 225
  Serjeant, Rev. John, i. 381
  Serjeaux family, iii. 258
  Serman, St. iv. 14
  Serpeknol, iv. 153
  Serpents, petrified, invariably wanted a head, ii. 298
  Sescombe of St. Kevorne, i. 313
  Seven Oaks, Kent, iv. 87 _bis_
  Seven years’ war, ii. 32, 245
  Severn channel, iv. 15
  ―――― river, iii. 298
  ―――― sea, iii. 331
  Seville, i. 161
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 82
  Seviock, iii. 374
  Seymour, Lord Hugh, cruised from Falmouth, ii. 18
  ―――― Charles Duke of Somerset, and Lady Elizabeth 460. Colonel H.
    iii. 231.――Edward, Duke of Somerset and protector, iv. 107
  ―――― of Bury Pomeroye, Sir Edward, i. 416
  Seyne fishing for pilchards, ii. 262
  Seyntaubyn, or Seynt Aubyn, i. 136, 261, 317, 318, 319, 414. Mr.
    265. Sir John, Bart. 121, 261 _bis_, 266 _ter._, 268, 271, 277, 350,
    417, 418. His address to the parish of Crowan on the outrage at
    Skewis 284. Charity schools endowed by 288. Thomas 261. Family
    monuments in Crowan church 288――ii. 160 _bis_. Ann 5. Catherine 199.
    Geoffrey, Sheriff of Cornwall, Sir Guy 181, 183, 395. John 213,
    _quin._, 354. Sir John 5, 176, 199 _bis_, 213, 214, 243. Margaret
    243. Margery 354.――St. Aubin, or St. Aubyn, Francis, iii. 80. John
    83. Rev. R. T. of Ruan Minor 424. Miss 133. Mr. a pupil of Dr.
    Borlase 53.――Sir John, iv. 73, 139. Mr. 22. Family 107
  ―――― of Clanawar, Colonel John, i. 113
  ―――― of Clowance, i. 261, 262, 263. Geoffrey 265. Sir Guy 261, 262,
    263, 265. John 262 _bis_. Sir John 262 _ter._, 263, 265. Thomas 262
    _bis_. Arms 262.――Geoffrey, ii. 385. John 122.――John, iii. 81, 317.
    Sir John 317, 318, 319. Thomas 211. Mr. 65.――Of Clowans, Colonel
    John, iv. 188
  ―――― of Crowan, i. 360
  ―――― of Trekininge, Sir John, i. 216
  Shaftesbury, ii. 26
  ―――― Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of, ii. 379
  Shakespeare, iv. 119
  Shakspeare of Pendarves, John, iii. 311
  Shannon river, iii. 434
  Shapcott, of Elton, Thomas, i. 170
  Shapter, Rev. Mr. ii. 106
  Sharp Tor, or Sharpy Torry, i. 189, _ter._――iii. 45.――Description
    of, i. 187
  Sheen Priory, Richmond, ii. 190
  Sheepshanks, Rev. Mr. ii. 105. His character 104
  Shell work, extraordinary, i. 147
  Shepard, Elizabeth, i. 222
  Shepherds, iii. 273. Origin of the name 272
  Sherborne manor, ii. 7
  Sheriff of Cornwall violently resisted in the execution of his duty
    by Henry Rogers at Skewis, i. 268
  ―――― Thady, iv. 116
  Sheviock barton, iii. 436
  ―――― manor, ii. 362――iii. 437
  ―――― parish, i. 32――ii. 250. Or Shevyock 59
  SHEVIOCK parish, by Hals, situation and boundaries, value of
    benefice, land tax, endowment of the church, Dawnay family, iii.
    436. By Tonkin, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, Sheviock manor
    437. By the Editor, church old, splendid monuments 438. Tale of the
    building of the church and a barn, advowson, Crofthole village, its
    situation, Porth Wrinkle 439. Trethel, statistics, rector, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 440
  Shillingham, iii. 464. Account of 463
  ―――― of Shillingham family, iii. 463
  Shipmoney, iii. 144 _bis_, 152
  Shipwreck, extraordinary, ii. 320
  Shoreham, i. 258
  Short, Charles, of Devon, ii. 218
  Shovel, Sir Cloudesley, iv. 174
  Shrewsbury, ii. 76. St. Chad, patron of 391
  ―――― Richard of, i. 88
  Shropshire, the Cornwalls twenty-two times sheriffs of, iii. 449
  Shuckburgh, Richard, i. 355.――Sir George. His Tables, iv. 145
  ―――― of Shuckburgh, i. 355
  Sibthorpe, i. 358
  Sibthorpia Europæa, iv. 180
  Siddenham, South, ii. 430
  Sidenham, Cuthbert and Humphrey, iv. 77
  Sidney, Sir Philip, Sir Beville Grenville was his rival, ii. 348
  Sigdon, ii. 71
  Sigebert, King of the East Angles, ii. 284
  Signals, from Maker church, iii. 106. Remarks on ibid.
  Silly, William, i. 223.――Mrs. ii. 136.――Elizabeth and Joseph, iii. 66
  ―――― of Minver and St. Wenn, John, iii. 237. Family 66. Arms 237
  ―――― of Trevella, Hender, iii. 237. William 237, 238
  Sillye, heir of, iv. 111
  Siloam, tower of, iii. 422
  Silvester, Pope, i. 237
  Simmons, George, iii. 215
  Simon’s, St. and St. Jude’s day, ii. 140
  Simon Ward or St. Breward parish, i. 62, 131――iv. 97
  Simpson, John, iii. 206
  Sion Abbey, ii. 176. Middlesex 209, 212 _bis_
  Sirius, its parallax ascertained by Dr. Maskelyne, ii. 222
  Sisters, the nine, iv. 2
  Sithian, St. Bertin, Abbot of, iv. 157
  Sithney parish, ii. 136, 141, 155, 156, 160. St. John’s hospital at
    157――iii. 419, 421.――Its governor, iv. 1.――Near Helston, singular
    tale of a fair removed from, iii. 309
  SITHNEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax, St. John’s
    hospital, a deficiency in the MS. iii. 441. Trout, royalty of the
    river, Trevelle’s tenure 442. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name
    ibid. A vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, impropriation, Penrose
    manor, its situation, Loo Pool, its trout, sandbank, used as a
    bridge, its danger, Mr. Penrose’s house, name of the river 443. The
    bar, the fish of the pool 444. By the Editor, distance of the church
    from Breage church, divided by a valley, attempt to make a harbour
    of Porthleaven ibid. Has failed, Penrose, improvements expected,
    Antron 445. Trevarnoe, St. John’s hospital, stone pointing out its
    site, impropriation of the tithes, present and a former incumbent
    446. Parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, form of the
    parish, Whele Vor 447
  Sixtus 5th, Pope, ii. 371 _bis_
  Skelton, ii. 186
  Skewish, Great, iv. 141
  ―――― Miss, iii. 147.――Collan and family, iv. 2
  Skewys, i. 267 _bis_, 272, 303
  ―――― of Skewys, John, i. 303
  Skidmore, Thomas, ii. 196
  Skinden, account of, ii. 338
  Skippon, Major General, i. 114 _bis_――iv. 188. His men distressed on
    their march, and charged by the King’s troops ibid. Commissioner for
    the parliament army 189
  Skyburiow, Miss, iii. 134
  Slade of Lanewa, George, i. 418
  ―――― of Trevennen, Simon, iii. 202 _bis_, and William 202
  Slancombe Dawney, i. 64
  Slannen, i. 347, 370
  Slanning, Sir Nicholas of Marstow, Devon, governor of Pendennis
    castle. Killed at the battle of Bristol against the rebels, and the
    marriage of his widow, ii. 13.――Sir Nicholas, Bart. iii. 76. Sir
    Nicholas of Marystow, Devon 75, 76. Arms 76
  Slapton, college of, Devon, iii. 352
  Slate from Drillavale quarry, the best in England, iv. 45
  Sloane’s, Sir Hans, MSS. iii. 154
  Slugg, John, ii. 189
  Small, i. 317
  Smeaton, Mr. ii. 264. Built the present Eddystone lighthouse 378
    _quat._, 432
  Smith, i. 78, 117.――Walter, ii. 70.――William, Bishop of Litchfield,
    afterwards of Lincoln, iii. 141――i. 218.――Mr. has taken a lease of
    the Scilly isles, iv. 173. Name 128
  ―――― of Crantock, Sir James, i. 250. Sir William 249. Arms 250
  ―――― of Devon, George and Grace, ii. 347
  ―――― of Exon, i. 250. Sir James 348
  ―――― of Kent, John, ii. 379
  ―――― of Mitchell Morton family, ii. 416
  ―――― of Trelizicke, i. 348
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408
  ――――’s, ii. 154
  Smithfield, execution in, ii. 192
  Smithick or Smithike, British name of Falmouth, ii. 20. Changed 8.
    Town and custom-house built 9
  Smithson, Sir Hugh, Duke of Northumberland, iii. 460
  Smyrna, iii. 187.――Rev. E. Nankivell, chaplain to the factory at,
    iv. 5
  Smyth, Rev. T. S. i. 49.――Rev. John, curate of St. Just, notice of,
    ii. 286. Monument, inscription, and cenotaph 287
  Snell, Rev. Mr. of Menheniot, iii. 168
  ―――― of Whilley, Elizabeth, iii. 160
  Soaprock, account of, ii. 360
  Sobieski, John, the preserver of Christendom, ii. 351
  Society, Antiquarian, ii. 224
  ―――― for propagating the Gospel, iii. 73
  ―――― Royal, ii. 224
  Solenny, Hostulus De, iv. 25, 26 _quat._ John 26 _ter._
  Solinus, i. 199
  Solomon, Duke of Cornwall, i. 294
  Somaster of Painsford, Devon, John and Marianne, ii. 304
  Somers, Lord, iii. 15
  Somerset, Duke of, i. 169 _quat._――ii. 182.――Charles Seymour, iii.
    460. John 65.――Edward Seymour, Protector, iv. 107
  Somersetshire, i. 113――ii. 110, 190, 293. Romantic scenery of
    88.――Insurgents enter, i. 86.――King Charles in, marched out of, iv.
    185. The Trevelyans sheriffs of 114
  Sondry, Thomas, iii. 387
  Sophocles, ii. 103, 165
  Sound, the English fleet sailed for, ii. 27
  South Downs, iii. 10
  ―――― Saxons, Cissa, King of, ii. 284
  ―――― Sea islands, iv. 45
  Southallington manor, i. 64
  Southampton, ii. 76
  Southernay, i. 108
  Southey’s lines upon St. Keyne’s well, ii. 295
  Southill parish, i. 151 _bis_――ii. 309 _bis_――iii. 43――iv. 6, 7
  SOUTHILL parish. See _Hill, South_
  South Teign, i. 170
  Sowle, i. 47
  Spain, i. 161 _ter._――ii. 107――iii. 187, 361――iv. 86.――Coast of,
    iii. 218.――Tobacco sold cheap in, ii. 43. War with 245. Her fleet
    ibid. Appeared in Plymouth Sound 246. Officers lost returning from
    325.――Elizabeth’s wars with, iii. 105.――Trade of Looe with, iv. 35
  Spaniards, ii. 6.――Invasion of Britain by, their name hated at
    Mousehole, iii. 287.――And French, sea-fight with, iv. 21
  Spanish galleons, Sir Richard Grenville sent in the Revenge to
    intercept, ii. 344
  ―――― galleys, five, burnt Penzance, iii. 81, 91
  ―――― merchants murdered, ii. 6
  ―――― pieces, ii. 6
  ―――― vessel wrecked, iii. 311
  ―――― wars, story of, ii. 6
  Spark of Plymouth, i. 370
  Sparks family, ii. 357
  Speaker of the House of Commons, ii. 68.――Speakers, Hakewell’s
    Catalogue of, iv. 44
  Speccott, i. 221. Sir John 381 _bis_. Arms 379.――Family, ii. 398,
    400.――Mr. iii. 449. His death 450
  ―――― of Penheale, John, i. 378 _bis_. Hon. John 378, 379. Seized
    with small pox the day after his marriage 379. His death and will
    ibid.――John and Colonel, ii. 399.――Of Penheel, John, iii. 38
  Speed, i. 217――iii. 111, 441――iv. 101; and Dugdale’s Monast. Anglic.
    i. 247――ii. 62, 96――iv. 101
  Spelman’s Glossary, iii. 389
  Spencer of Lancaster, i. 263
  Spernon, i. 127
  Sperrack of Trigantan, i. 258
  Spettigue, Rev. Edward of Michaelstow, iii. 223.――John, iv. 62
  Spigurnel, Henry, iii. 2
  Spinster’s town, iv. 140
  Spour family, ii. 227, 229. Henry, Miss, and arms 227
  Spoure of Trebartha, Edmund, and Mary, ii. 396.――Family, i. 302, 303
  Spry, Edward, iii. 378. Sir. J. T. and Admiral 446. Miss 66. Family
    194, 449. Line upon 449
  ―――― or Sprye of Tregony, Peter and his daughter, iii. 77. Miss 75
  Sprye, A. G. i. 28. Rev. William 106. Arms and etymology of name
    28.――Samuel Thomas, M.P. for Bodmin, ii. 35. Admiral 34.――Family, i.
    29, 61 _ter._――ii. 54, 300
  ―――― of Blissland, i. 28
  Spur, Mr. ii. 120
  Spye, derivation of name, i. 28
  Squire, Arthur, ii. 377
  Stabback, Rev. Thomas, i. 293.――Rev. Samuel of Sancreed, iii. 427
  Stackenoe, iv. 1
  Stackhouse, Mrs. i. 400. Edward William 401. Rev. Thomas, author of
    the History of the Bible 400. John 163 _ter._, 400 _bis_. William
    400. Dr. William 163, 400 _bis_.――John, iii. 367 _bis_. Thomas of
    Beenham, Berks 366. His works ibid. Rev. Dr. William, rector of St.
    Erme ibid. _bis_. William 367 _bis_
  Stadyon, ii. 139
  Stafford, Baron of, ii. 230. Baronial family 231
  ―――― county, ii. 89
  ―――― Humphrey, i. 64.――Edmund, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 446. Family 117
  Stainton, Henry De, iii. 2
  Stamford, Earl of, governor of Plymouth, iii. 183. Defeated 351
  ―――― hill, iii. 351
  ―――― creek, iii. 256
  Stanbury, iii. 255
  ―――― family, iii. 350
  ―――― of Stanbury, Richard or John, Bishop of Hereford, family and
    their property, iii. 255
  Stancomb Dawney, iii. 436
  Stanhope, i. 61. Hon. and Rev. H., 149
  Stannaries, laws relating to, i. 365.――Records of, iii. 57.――Earl of
    Radnor, Lord Warden of, ii. 380.――John Thomas, Vice Warden of, iv. 91
  Starford, William, i. 108
  Stawel, Edward Lord, H. B. Legge, Lord, H. S. B. Legge, Lord, and
    Mary, iii. 206
  Stawell, John, ii. 196
  Steam boats, discovery anticipated, iv. 91
  ―――― engine, the first used in Cornwall, i. 127
  Stebens, Rev. R. S. of South Petherwin, iii. 338
  Stephen, King, ii. 87――iii. 433, 456 _bis_, 463――iv. 81, 82, 140
  ―――― prior of Launceston, ii. 419
  ―――― St. the protomartyr, iii. 450, 456
  ―――― St. by Leland, iv. 292
  ―――― St. cum Tresmore, ii. 430
  ―――― ’s, St. abbey, dissolution of, iv. 68
  ―――― St. altar in Dublin cathedral, iv. 146
  ―――― St. chapel in Dublin cathedral, iv. 147
  ―――― St. church, iii. 458
  ―――― St. college, by Launceston, i. 112――iv. 185.――Prior of, i. 378
    _bis_
  ―――― St. collegiate church, suppressed, ii. 419. Ralph, Dean of 426.
    Prior of 422
  ―――― St. parish, i. 103, 128, 140, 251, 310――iii. 195, 207, 335, 354
    _bis_, 395――iv. 152
  Stephen’s, St. by Leland, iv. 281
  ―――― St. in Brannel church, iii. 198. The advowson 202
  ――――’s St. in Brannel or Branwell parish, i. 310――ii. 109, 110,
    353――iv. 54
  STEPHEN’S, ST. in BRANNEL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, consolidation with St. Denis, and Carhayes,
    endowment, patron, incumbent, land tax, court, iii. 448. Bodenike,
    the love adventures of Mr. Tanner and Mrs. Windham 449. By Tonkin,
    situation and boundaries, dedication, daughter to Carhayes, value,
    patron, incumbent 450. Manor of Brannel 451. Whitaker, singular
    constitution of the parish, manor of Carhayes supposed a royal one
    451. Name and appearance of the house confirm the supposition 452.
    St. Denis parochiated, Carhayes not mentioned in Pope Nicholas’s
    valor 453. By Editor, church stands high, lofty tower, potatoe
    cultivation, monument in church to Dr. Hugh Wolrige with epitaph,
    statistics, fluctuation in mining, china clay, Geology by Dr. Boase
    454. China stone and clay, quantities exported from Cornwall 455
  ―――― St. by Launceston parish, ii. 361, 417, 419, 420――iii. 466
  STEPHEN’S, ST. near LAUNCESTON parish, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, collegiate church, converted into a priory, iii. 456.
    Impropriated all the benefices annexed to it, land tax, fairs, a
    friary 457. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of benefice 457.
    By Editor, early history indistinct, college changed into a
    monastery, St. Thomas’s church, etymology of Launceston, the church
    seated high with a lofty tower, inscription to Viscount Newhaven,
    Sir Jonathan Phillips 458. Barton of Carnedon, modern history of the
    parish, borough of Newport, its constitution, Werrington 459. Its
    deer park 460. Fairs, Sarah Coat, aged 104. Statistics, incumbent,
    Geology by Dr.Boase 461
  ――――’s, St. by Launceston, prior of, iv. 51, 59, 63 _bis_, 68
  ―――― St. in Lesnewith, iv. 63
  ―――― St. in Penwith, iv. 50, 51 _quat._
  ―――― St. by Saltash parish, i. 199, 203――ii. 8, 110.――Sheet of
    Hals’s MS. relating to, communicated to the Editor, iv. 184
  STEPHEN’S, ST. near SALTASH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    iii. 461. Ancient name, value of benefice, castle, honour, and
    manor, of Trematon, their history 462. Shillingham, etymology,
    Buller family, treachery of a domestic chaplain 463. Fentongollan
    reluctantly sold to raise the amount of a fine 464. Earth,
    Wyvillecomb 465. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, a vicarge, its
    value, &c. ibid. By the Editor 466. Statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 470
  ―――― St. point, i. 381, 386
  ―――― St. rectory, i. 72
  Stephens family, i. 84 _bis_, 121 _bis_――ii. 43, 77, 80, 269――iv.
    67.――Rev. Edward, ii. 338. Samuel 215. Mr. 134, 259.――Rev. Darell,
    of Little Petherick, iii. 335. Rev. D. of Maker 109. John 48, 387.
    Rev. Mr. 240. Mrs. 8.――Nicholas, iv. 77
  ―――― of Culverhouse near Exeter, Richard, iv. 67
  ―――― of St. Ives, John, i. 353, 354, 392, 399 _bis_, 403. Samuel
    403.――Family escaped the plague, ii. 271. Anne, Augustus, Harriet
    270. John 269 _ter._, 270 _bis_, Maria 270. Samuel 270 _quin._
  ―――― of Tregenna, Samuel, i. 392, 403.――Mr. ii. 354.――In St. Ives,
    Rev. J. iii. 54. Samuel 440
  ―――― of Tregorne, Mr. iii. 311
  Stepney, iii. 188
  Stepper point, iii. 281, 282
  Sternhold, Thomas, i. 96――iii. 238
  Stevens family, iii. 192
  Steward, Lord, ii. 68
  Stidio, Bishop of Cornwall, ii. 60, 61――iii. 415
  Stithian parish, i. 221, 236.――Stithians, ii. 129, 140.――Stithyans
    or St. Stithians, iii. 59, 305, 380
  ―――― St. iv. 2
  ――――’s St. church, iv. 4
  STITHIAN’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient
    name, mother church to Peranwell, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, impropriation, saint, iv. 1. Penaluricke
    barton and manor, Tretheage, the nine maids, tin 2. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, saint, a vicarage ibid. Patron,
    impropriation, incumbent, manor of Tretheage 3. By Editor, church
    and tower, manors of Kennal and Roseeth, barton of Tretheage ibid.
    Penalurick, Treweek, Tresavren, Trevales, the church, charter of
    Edmund Earl of Cornwall 4. Value of the benefice, late vicar,
    statistics, present vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 5
  Stithiany, ii. 136
  Stock, D. J. E. his Life of Dr. Beddoes, iii. 251
  Stoke, i. 266.――Meaning of, iv. 7
  ―――― Climsland, i. 151, 153 _bis_――ii. 229, 230, 309――iii. 40, 43
  ―――― Climsland, or Stow Climsland manor, iv. 6, 7, 11
  STOKE CLIMSLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor, writ,
    Hengiston downs, tin works, part of Cari Bollock, iv. 6. Manor of
    Rileaton, writ, benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax. By Tonkin and
    Whitaker, situation and boundaries, value, patron, incumbent, manor
    of Climsland 7. Cary Bullock park, etymology 8. By the Editor, manor
    of Stoke Climsland, and Climsland prior, Carybullock, Whiteford, Mr.
    Call, memoir of 9. Afterwards Sir John, Sir W. P. Call, manor of
    Climsland prior, advowson 11. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 12
  ―――― Damerel, i. 266
  ―――― Damerell parish, iv. 39
  ―――― Gabriel church, i. 367
  ―――― Gabriel vicarage, i. 130
  Stone, advowson, iii. 115
  ―――― of Bundbury, Wilts, James, i. 259
  Stonehouse, west, now Mount Edgecombe, iii. 107
  Stones, circles of, i. 141
  Storm which destroyed Eddystone lighthouse, iii. 376.――At Gwenap,
    ii. 132
  Stourton, Lord, iii. 357. His daughter 369
  Stow’s History of England, iii. 310
  Stowe, in Bucks, carvings from Stowe in Cornwall, transferred to,
    ii. 346, 351
  ―――― in Kilkhampton, ii. 340. Etymology 232. The Grenvilles resided
    there for many generations 344. Mansion built by John, Earl of Bath
    346, 351. The noblest house in the west of England 346. Demolished,
    materials sold, wainscot of the chapel sold to Lord Cobham, and
    transferred to Stowe, Bucks 346, 351. Magnificence and situation
    346. The carving of the chapel by Mr. Chuke, ib. Built at the
    national expence, almost all the gentlemen’s seats in Cornwall
    embellished from 351.――Staircase from, iii. 279. Spoils of 351
  Stowell, Sir John, ii. 233.――William, iii. 358
  Stradling, Ann, iii. 316. Edmund 316 _bis_
  ―――― of Dunlevy, Edmund, iii. 211
  Strange, Nicholas, i. 246
  Strathan, or Stratton hundred, iii. 22, 114, 254, 349
  Straton, i. 60
  Stratone, iv. 1
  Stratton hundred, i. 133――ii. 232 340, 402, 413――iv. 12, 15, 39, 40,
    131, 152 _bis_.――Bailiffry of, ii. 416
  ―――― manor, ii. 427――iv. 15, 16 _bis_
  ―――― parish, ii. 273, 340, 413, 416, 429, 430――iii. 114, 274, 349,
    352. Roman road through 324.――Battle at, ii. 349.――Victory, i. 113
  STRATTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    iv. 12. Patron, land tax, market, Thurlebere, battle in the
    rebellion, Sir B. Grenville unhorsed 13. Chudleigh taken prisoner,
    royal party victorious, with a loss of 200, took 17 guns, subsequent
    fertility of the field, Sir Ralph Hopton and his ancestry 14. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, Roman way, value of benefice, a
    vicarage, patron, manor 15. Its value 16. By Editor, former road
    through Stratton and Binomy manors, manor of Efford, church and
    tower ibid. Great age of Elizabeth Cornish, the tithes, manor of
    Sanctuary changed for the honour of Wallingford, Bude, jetty, canal
    efficacy of shell-sand as manure, boats used with wheels, Fulton’s
    improvement of canal navigation 17. A watering place, Launcells
    house, G. B. Kingdon, Esq. instance of longevity, bells, height of
    Hennacleve cliff 18. Statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 19
  Straughan, Colonel, challenged the King’s army, his troop led by
    himself, iv. 186. Challenge accepted, his orders, and charge, took
    some of the King’s horses 187
  Street, John, accomplice with Rogers, convicted and executed, i.
    269. His trial for the murder of Carpenter 272. For that of Woolston 276
  ―――― Nowan, iii. 288
  Stretch of Devon, Lord of Pinhoe, iv. 43
  Strettoun, by Leland, iv. 258
  Stribble hill, i. 223
  Strode, Richard, ii. 231
  Stroote, i. 348
  Stukeley, i 141
  Styria, iii. 186
  Subterranean vault at Trove, i. 143
  “Sudeley Castle, History of,” iii. 160
  Suffolk, ii. 66
  ―――― Duke of, iv. 107.――Henry Grey, ii. 294 _bis_
  ―――― Earl of, iii. 154.――Edmund de la Pole, i. 86
  Sulpicius, St. iii. 122
  Sumaster, ii. 71
  Summercourt, i. 388 _bis_
  Sunderland, Earl of, i. 84 _bis_, 126. Charles Spencer 127
  ―――― man of war, ii. 32――iii. 186
  Surat, ii. 227――iii. 188
  Surrey, iii. 10
  ―――― Thomas Holland, Duke of, iii. 27
  Surrius’s book, i. 214
  Surtecote, Angero de, iv. 27
  Survey of Cornwall, iii. 437――iv. 68, 100, 139, 156. Of the Duchy of
    Cornwall 6
  Sussex county, iii. 206 _bis_. Weald of 10
  Sutherland, i. 349, 350, 359
  Sutton, Rev. Henry, ii. 409.――Rev. William of St. Michael Carhayes,
    and St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 450
  Swallock, i. 131
  Swannacot manor, iv. 136
  Swanpool, i. 137, 138
  Swansea, i. 364――ii. 241
  ―――― coal sent to Cornwall, iii. 340
  Sweden, King of, ii. 27. Bestows medals on English officers ibid.
  Sweet, i. 417.――Rev. Charles, iii. 38
  ―――― of Kentisbury, Rev. Charles 381
  Swift, Jonathan, Dean of St. Patrick’s, i. 58.――Restored Archbishop
    Tregury’s tomb, iv. 141, 144, 147
  Swimmer, Robert, ii. 70
  Swiss cantons, had a custom of trying after execution, iii. 186
  Swithin, St. ii. 403
  Switzerland, iii. 231
  Sydemon, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Sydenham, Devon, iii. 126
  Sydney Sussex college, Cambridge, iv. 136 _bis_
  Sylea island, iv. 230
  Symmonds, Rev. John, ii. 116
  Symonds, Rev. Mr. i. 353, 354
  Symons, William, i. 105, 107.――Rev. Mr. ii. 116.――Rev. J. T. of
    Trevalga, iv. 67. Family 62
  ―――― of Halt, i. 162
  Symonward, iv. 49
  Symphorian, two saints of the name, iv. 117, 120
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 258
  Symphrogia, St. iv. 117
  Syriac, St. iv. 111, 112
  Syrian castles, ii. 423
  Sythany, i. 261
  Sythney, hospital of the Knights of St. John at, iii. 78
  Syth’s, St. ii. 405

  “Tables of the Greek Language,” iv. 87
  Tacabere, i. 133, 134 _bis_
  Tacitus, i. 256――iii. 162
  Tagus, i. 372
  Talbot, William, iv. 28. Family 145
  Talcare, i. 20――iv. 24
  Talgrogan, i. 17
  Talland, ii. 430 _bis_. Tallant 398. Talland, Tallant, or Tallend
    parish, iii. 65, 249, 291, 294
  TALLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    land tax, etymology, iv. 19. West Looe, borough and town 20.
    Killygarth barton and manor 21. Hendarsike 22. Trenake 23. By
    Tonkin and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, a vicarage, value,
    impropriation, patron, incumbent, Polpera ibid. Porth Tallant,
    manor, etymology, the church, story of Mr. Murth and his French
    miller 24. By the Editor, additions from Bond relating to West
    Looe, in the hamlet of Lemain, barton of Port Looe, Lammana,
    description of the chapel 25. Grants relating to the monastery 26,
    27. Midmain rock, Horestone rock, Portnadle bay, corporation of
    West Looe 28. West Looe down, Giant’s hedge, St. Winnow down 29.
    Romans directed their roads to Fords, Causey from Leskeard to Looe
    30. Two circular encampments, described, Berry park 31. Prospects,
    five barrows, grave discovered, a celt found 32. Some in the
    British Museum, gold chain and brass instruments found, Polvellan
    33. Inclosure of the down desirable 34. Property in it, lettings
    35. Trade of Looe, church, Beville monument, Polbenro, beauty of
    the road from Fowey to Looe, Killigarth manor, Kilmenawth, or
    Kelmenorth, hamlet of Lemaine, extract from an old record 36.
    Portlooe, Looe island, Polvellan, Greek inscription, Admiral Wager
    37. Killygarth, Polperro, advowson, statistics, incumbent,
    impropriation, Geology by Dr. Boase 38
  Talland town, iv. 36
  Tallard, Marshall, ii. 307 _bis_
  Tallat, Captain, iii. 187
  Talmeneth, by Leland, iv. 264
  Tamalanc, i. 2
  Tamar river, i. 107, 113, 133 _bis_, 266, 310――ii. 362, 364, 413,
    418 _bis_, 432――iii. 1, 40, 45, 104, 114, 121, 166, 254 _bis_, 298,
    301, 456, 457, 461――iv. 6, 7, 15, 39 _bis_, 40 _ter._, 70, 152,
    185.――Romantic, iii. 42. Its banks 460.――The country adjacent to,
    may be proud of Mr. Call, iv. 9
  Tamara, the Roman, iv. 40
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 291
  Tamarix Gallica, iv. 180
  Tamarton, i. 107
  ―――― chapel, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― hundred, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― parish, iv. 131, 152 _bis_
  TAMARTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, Tamar river,
    mentioned by Ptolemy, ancient name of the parish, church recent,
    land tax, manor, iv. 39. Line of a Saxon poet on Athelstan’s victory
    40. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, value of benefice, a
    rectory, incumbent, patron ibid. Manor 41. By Editor, Lysons on the
    descents of property, manor of Hornacott, Ogbere, Vacye, villages of
    Alvacot, Headon, and Venton, statistics, ib. Incumbent, and Geology
    by Dr. Boase 42
  Tamarton parish, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― north, manor, iv. 41
  Tamerton, i. 241――ii. 430
  Tamerworth harbour, iii. 104, 105
  Tamesworth haven, i. 32
  Tanis, parish of, ii. 208
  Tanner, i. 146, 153 _ter._, 159.――Bishop 200――ii. 201, 246――iii.
    233, 448, 449――iv. 104, 112.――His Notitia Monastica, i. 134, 146,
    250, 251, 300――ii. 209――iv. 102, 104. App. 10. 319 to 336.――John,
    iii. 202, 372, 450. Love story of 449. Rev. Mr. 199. Rev. Mr. of St.
    Stephen’s in Branel 448. Family 198
  ―――― of Carvinike, Anthony, i. 386
  ―――― of Court and Boderick, i. 387
  ―――― of Cullumpton, George, ii. 110
  Taperell, John, iii. 16
  Tapestry at Trewinard, i. 358
  Tarr, Rev. Mr. ii. 251
  Tarsus, iii. 284
  Tassagard, iv. 146
  Tathius, St. notice of, ii. 44
  Taunton, ii. 27, 76, 190, 191.――Insurgents march to, i. 86
  ―――― Richard of Truro, lent Hals’s MS. to the Editor, the son of W.
    E. iii. 18. Richard 407. Family 18
  Tavistock, i. 158, 159
  ―――― Abbey, in Devon, ii. 274――iii. 372, 384, 385, 459, 460――iv. 6,
    64, 169, 171.――Abbot of, ii. 365――iii. 459 _bis_.――Livignus, ii. 60.
    Osbert 426
  ―――― market, i. 79
  ―――― river, source of, iv. 237
  Tawlaght, iv. 146
  Taxatio Benefic. of Pope Nicholas, iii. 5, 24, 40, 112, 277, 291,
    306 _bis_, 334, 336, 339, 345, 352, 372, 374, 384, 396, 437, 442,
    443, 457 _bis_――iv. 15, 23, 40, 44, 62, 66, 76, 95, 112, 118, 129,
    140, 153, 162
  ―――― Eccles. ii. 394 _bis_――iv. 159
  Taxation of Pope Nicholas, iv. 46.――To the Pope’s Annats, ii. 116
  Taylder of St. Mabe, Joan, and Thomas her father, iii. 76
  Taylor, i. 32
  Teague, Mr. i. 254
  Teath, St. parish, i. 375, 382――ii. 401, or Tethe, iv. 95 _bis_,
    99, 137
  TEATH, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, his
    history, iv. 42. Ancient name, value of benefice, land tax,
    Bodanan, the Cheyney family, their monuments and arms in the
    church 43. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, saint, a vicarage,
    value, patron, impropriator 44. By the Editor, Lysons gives the
    descent of property, Tregordock manor, Drillavale Quarry,
    Treveares, Captain Bligh of the Bounty 45. Church, age, situation,
    roads, anecdotes of Mr. Phillips, value of benefice 46.
    Statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase, Treburget mine 47
  Tedda, i. 2
  Tees river, i. 290
  Tegleston, i. 1
  Tehidy, ii. 241.――Manor, iii. 380 _bis_, and Honor 384, 388, 389
    _bis_, 390
  Temple bar, iii. 142
  ―――― Rev. Mr. character of, ii. 104
  ―――― manor, iv. 48
  ―――― moors, ii. 36――iv. 46, 48
  ―――― parish, i. 21, 60, 167――iv. 128, 129
  TEMPLE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, Knights
    Templars, ancient name, value of benefice, iv. 48. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, value of benefice 49. By Editor, church
    founded by the Templars ibid. Potatoes cultivated, parish attached
    to the manor of Treleigh, patronage, incumbent, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 50
  Temporibus, John de, iii. 313
  Tencreek, account of, i. 254.――A singular tree there, iii. 169
  ―――― of Tencreek, i. 254, 347 _bis_, 396. Arms 255
  ―――― of Treworgan, i. 206
  Terceira islands, a battle with the Spaniards off, ii. 344
  Terence, notes on, iv. 87
  Tereza, St. iii. 150
  Terrill, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Testa, Abbess of Wimborne, iv. 126
  Teth, St. i. 322――iv. 66
  Teucrium latifolia, iv. 183
  ―――― frutescens, iv. 183
  Teuthey, by Leland, iv. 279
  Teutonic ears, name of Winifred not soft enough for, iv. 127
  Tew, St. i. 174
  Tewan, i. 11
  Tewardevi, iv. 93
  Tewington manor, by Hals, i. 41. Antiquity, court leet, etymology
    45. By Tonkin, etymology 46. Possessors, and quarry at 47
  Tewkesbury abbey, i. 288.――Gloucestershire, iv. 140
  ―――― battle of, ii. 260. Sir John Grenville left for dead on the
    field 345
  Teynham, Lord, iii. 140
  Thamar river, iv. 233
  Thames river, iii. 10, 63, 310. High water in 98
  Thanks, i. 37
  Thaumaturgus, Gregory, i. 388
  Theliaus, St. history of, i. 321
  ―――― St. church, i. 321
  Theocritus, by Warton, ii. 266
  Theodore, iv. 8
  Thesdon, a Prince of Cornwall, iii. 342
  Thesdon’s castle, iii. 342
  Thessalonica, principality of, sale of the city to the Venetians,
    ii. 366
  Thetford, ii. 76
  Thica Vosa, an intrenchment, ii. 113
  Thick, Reginald de, i. 383
  Thomas the Rhymer, ii. 308
  Thomas, Henry, i. 277. J. 10. John 19.――Mr. ii. 414.――John and
    Richard took the name of Pendarves, two brothers took that of
    Carnsew, another of Roscrow, and another of Caweth, the arms of all,
    ii. 337.――Andrew, John, his father, and John, iii. 326. John, built
    a house at Chiverton 333. William changed his name to Carnsew 61.
    Miss 333. Family 125. Arms 326.――John, iv. 109 _bis_. John acquired
    a fortune at Truro 90. Rev. Samuel of Truro 76. Miss 117
  ―――― of Glamorganshire, in Wales, Howell and family, iii. 326
  ―――― of Tregamena in Verian, iii. 202
  ―――― of Treon, i. 136
  ―――― St. Apostle and martyr, iv. 50. His day 2
  ―――― St. Aquinas, i. 312
  ―――― St. à Becket, i. 158, or of Canterbury, ii. 73, 96 _bis_,
    156――iv. 1, 50
  ―――― St. church, iii. 458
  ―――― St. parish, St. i. 377――ii. 417, 420――iii. 335, 456, 457, 458
    _bis_
  THOMAS, ST. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquity,
    value of benefice, iv. 50. By Tonkin, boundaries, shape, river
    Kensey 51. By Editor, church small, stands on the site of Launceston
    priory, its remains, well, statistics ibid.――Incumbent, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 52
  Thomas’s, St. street, iv. 51
  Thompson, James, i. 58.――John, ii. 192.――Henry and Rev. J. T., iv. 109
  Thoms, i. 94 _bis_.――Mr. family name changed, and arms, iii. 125
  Thomy, Robert, iii. 125
  Thomye, Robert, iii. 143
  Thorlibear manor, ii. 416
  Thornbury in Devon, iii. 450
  Three Barrows, ii. 317
  Thriades, book of the, i. 338
  Throckmorton, Clement, i. 16
  Throwley, Sir Nicholas, ii. 395
  Thunbergia, Coccinea, iv. 183
  Thunderbolt at St. Michael’s Mount, ii. 199
  Thundering Legion, miracle of, ii. 76
  Thunderstorm, ii. 157
  Thuraken, a Turkish General, ii. 367 _bis_
  Thurigny and Grenville, Robert Fitz Hamon, Lord of, ii. 344, 347
  Thurlebear family, iii. 270
  Thurlebere, account of, iv. 13
  ―――― de, John, family and heiress, iv. 13
  Thynne, Henry Frederick, Lord Carteret heir of the Grenville
    property, and Lord George present possessor of the title and
    estates, ii. 346
  Tiber river, iv. 148
  Tiberius, Emperor, i. 197
  Tide, high, hours of at various ports, iii. 98. Nine hours and half
    flowing from Land’s End to London 99. Extraordinary in 1099, 310
  Tidiford village, ii. 362. Trade at, limestone burnt at 362
  Tidlaton, ii. 427
  Ties, Henry de, ii. 130
  Tilbury, army at, i. 161
  Tillie, Stephen, i. 270, 271 _bis_, 274.――Sir James, iii. 163, 346.
    His extraordinary will 163, 166. Other particulars of him, his arms
    destroyed 166. J. W., 346. Count 166
  Tillie, manor, iv. 55
  Tilly, James, i. 315. Sir James assumed the arms of Count Tilly,
    deprived of them 314. Directions for his funeral 315
  ―――― of Pentilly, James, iii. 44
  Timothy, Epistle to, i. 198, 206
  Tin, fetched by the Greeks from Falmouth harbour, ii. 3. Mode of
    selling in Cornwall 318
  ―――― smelting-house at Treloweth, i. 365. Lamb tin preferred abroad 365
  ―――― stream, of Luxilian, iii. 58
  ―――― works in Stoke Climsland parish, iv. 6
  Tincombe, Mr. iv. 4
  Tindall’s Bible, i. 314
  Tinmouth, John of, iii. 331
  Tinners, St. Perran the patron of, iii. 313
  Tinney Hall, manor, iii. 38
  Tintagel, by Leland, iv. 284
  ―――― castle, by Leland, iv. 259
  Tintagell castle, i. 381――ii. 308, 402.――Seat of the Dukes of
    Cornwall, and birth-place of King Arthur, i. 339. _See Dundagell_
  ―――― parish, ii. 401――iii. 22――iv. 44, 66.――King Arthur’s castle in,
    curious rock, iii. 180. _See Dundagell_
  TINTAGELL parish. _See Dundagell_
  Tinten manor, iv. 97
  Tippet or Tebbot of Callestock Veor, John and family, iii. 321
  ―――― of St. Wen, family, iii. 321
  Tippett, John, iii. 341
  Titanium, a metal discovered in Manaccan parish, iii. 113
  Titus, Emperor, i. 198
  Tiverton, i. 170
  ―――― school, iii. 258
  Toby, i. 282
  Todi in Tuscany, ii. 125
  Todscad, i. 212
  Tol Peder-Penwith, iii. 35, 36. Scenery, accident at 35
  Tolcarne, ii. 48――iii. 232.――Account of, ii. 278
  ―――― or minster, an alien priory, iv. 101
  Tolgoath, i. 415
  Tollays in Redruth and St. Just, iii. 359
  Toller, Mr. ii. 43
  Tollgus manor, iii. 382, 383. Etymology 382. House 383
  Tolskiddy, i. 213
  Tolverne manor, ii. 275, 276, _bis_, 278 _bis_. Henry 8th said to
    have passed two nights at 280
  Tom, Great, of Oxford, inscription upon, iii. 241
  Tombstone at Gunwall, ii. 128
  Tomm, i. 78
  Toms, Miss, iii. 176
  Tonacomb, iii. 255
  Tonkin, Mr. i. 296. James 10. Thomas 8, 9, 10. Rev. Uriah 147.
    Particulars of the family, and monumental inscriptions 12. Arms 9.
    Arms and motto 13.――Hugh, iii. 325. John, his character and adoption
    of Sir Humphrey Davy 94.――Thomas the historian of Cornwall, ii. 75,
    76, 104, 199, 238, 239, 251, 256, 295, 297, 354 _bis_, 381, 383,
    399, 405, 411.――iii. 17, 20, 32, 38, 57, 62, 63, 66, 90, 120, 135,
    177 _bis_, 192 _bis_, 205, 214, 223, 228, 231 _bis_, 238 _bis_, 243,
    245, 261, 274, 302, 313, 314, 318 _bis_, 320, 322, 323, 325, 328,
    366 _bis_, 386, 405, 406, 434, 451.――iv. 24, 25, 62, 65, 76 _bis_,
    78, 120 _ter._, 165.――His Parochial history, iii. 96.――His notion of
    a Danish camp controverted, iv. 78, 80, 81. Does not notice the
    Scilly Isles 168. His etymology of Elerky 119, 120. Whitaker’s
    remarks on it 119.――Rev. Uriah, iii. 7, 94. Vicar of Lelant 88.
    Character of 94. Family 94
  ―――― of Newlyn, iii. 429
  ―――― of Penwenick, Michael, iii. 315 _bis_. His arms 315
  ―――― of Trelevan, Mr. iii. 193
  ―――― of Trenance, near Porthoustock, Mr. ii. 326
  ―――― of Trevannance, Thomas, iii. 358
  Tonkyn, Miss, ii. 255
  ―――― of St. Agnes, i. 234
  ―――― of Hendre, John, i. 234
  ―――― of Trevownas, i. 396
  ―――― of Trewawnance Julian, i. 399. Thomas 399, 400
  Tonsen, i. 254
  Tooke, John, ii. 195
  Tor Point, iii. 121. Road to Leskeard from 439
  Torbay, King William’s landing at, ii. 112. English fleet anchored
    in 247
  Torleh, John, iii. 387
  Torr, Mr. iii. 321
  Tory administration, ii. 245
  Tothill, William, ii. 195
  Totness in Devon, iii. 102, 103
  Tottysdone, ii. 429
  Touche family, ii. 415
  Touchet, James, Lord Audley, i. 86
  Toup, Jonathan, ii. 284. An eminent scholar, his father lecturer of
    St. Ives, his education, &c. and principal works 265. Death and
    monument 266.――Rev. Jonathan, iii. 123 _bis_. Monument to 123
  Towan, i. 234――iii. 340, 345
  Towednack parish, ii. 260, 271, 358――iii. 5 _bis_, 7, 13, 46――iv. 164
  TOWEDNACK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, iv. 52.
    Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax,
    Castle-an-Dunes, Trecragan 53. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, daughter to Lelant, ib. By Editor, saint, soil ibid. Produces
    much tin, also some whetstone, Editor’s manor, court rolls complete,
    foundation of the walls of Amellibrea, Cornish tenures 54. Copyholds
    extinct, record of a manor court, the homage, oath, charge 55.
    Matters to be presented 56. A petition from the widow of Colonel
    Humphrey Noye to Charles 2nd, for the title of Sandys of the Vine
    57. Unsuccessful, impropriation, feast, statistics 58. Geology by Dr
    Boase 59
  Tower, i. 29
  ―――― of London, i. 134――iii. 154, 298, 350――iv. 83.――Sir John Eliot
    committed to, ii. 66. Perkin Warbeck ditto 190, 191.――Sir Richard
    Vyvyan conveyed to, iii. 136, 217. His daughter born there 136. The
    Bishops committed to 296. Mr. Buller sent to 464
  Towington, iii. 195
  Townsend, Francis, Windsor Herald, ii. 375
  “Tractatus de Corde,” &c. iv. 98
  Tracy family, iii. 286
  Tracye, Thomas de, ii. 119
  Tradescantia crassula, iv. 183
  Tragedies of Seneca, notes on, iv. 87
  Trajan, Emperor, i. 206
  Transubstantiation, Cornish doctrine against, i. 109. Berengarius
    against, Romish doctrine triumphant 110
  Travelling a century ago, anecdote of, iv. 91
  Travers, Mr. i. 324
  Tre Yeo, ii. 416
  Treago, account of, i. 248
  ―――― of Treago, i. 248. Arms 249
  Trearick, Prebend of, i. 383
  Trearike, Lord of, i. 382
  Trease of Blissland, etymology, i. 61
  Treassow, account of, iii. 47. A perturbed spirit banished from 48
  Treasurer of England, Lord High, William Scrope, Earl of Wiltshire,
    iii. 129
  Trebant water, iv. 29
  Trebarfoot, iii. 352
  ―――― of Trebarfoot, family, iii. 352
  Trebartha, account of by Editor, ii. 228. Monuments to its
    possessors 229
  Trebatha, account of, ii. 226
  Trebeigh manor in St. Ives, iv. 50
  Trebell village, ii. 385
  Trebennen borough, i. 323 _ter._
  Treberrick in St. Michael Carhays, account of, iii. 202
  Trebersey family, iii. 337
  Trebigh, i. 410. Account of 411
  Trebilliock, two brothers, ii. 255
  Trebizond, empire of, ii. 368
  Treblithike, iii. 65
  Treburget, iv. 47
  Trebursus, ii. 428
  Treby of Trebigh, Hon. George, Lord Chief Justice, and arms, i. 412
  Trecan, iii. 448.――Account of, ii. 397
  Trecarrell, iii. 438
  ―――― family and arms, iii. 40, 41
  ―――― of Trecarrell, Sir H. iii. 44. Built Launceston church 42; and
    re-built Linkinhorne church 45
  ―――― manor, iii. 40, 41. Account of, and monuments to its possessors 43
  Trecragen castle, iv. 53
  ―――― hall, iv. 53
  Trecroben, iii. 7
  ―――― hill, iii. 7. Account of 11
  Trecroogo village, iii. 337
  Tredawl, i. 25
  Tredeathy, account of, iii. 66
  Tredenham, Sir Joseph, i. 44.――Family, i. 305, 414――iii. 381
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 207
  ―――― of Tredenham, i. 417.――In Probus, family and Sir Joseph, ii.
    217.――Sir Joseph, family, iii. 361; and their property 362. Arms 361
    _bis_
  ―――― of Tregonan, i. 418. John 416, 418. Sir John and Mary 418. Sir
    Joseph, _ter._ and Sir William 416
  ―――― manor, iii. 361
  Tredevy, by Leland, iv. 258
  Tredidon barton, iii. 459
  ―――― of Tredidon, family, iii. 459
  Tredine castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  Tredinham family, ii. 276 _bis_, 281. Sir Joseph 170. Governor of
    St. Mawe’s castle 277. Patron of St. Just 278
  Tredinick, i. 116, 117. Etymology 117
  ―――― Christopher and his arms, i. 116
  ―――― of St. Breock, arms, iv. 95
  Tredrea, the Editor’s place in Cornwall, iii. 307――iv. 143.――Account
    of, i. 360
  ―――― of Tredrea, i. 360, 365
  Tredreath town, iii. 6, 8
  Tree, singular one at Tencreek, iii. 169
  Treegoodwill, ii. 405
  Treen manor, iv. 166
  Trees, subterranean, ii. 207
  Trefelens of Trefelens, William, iii. 326
  Trefey family, iii. 44
  Treffrey in Lanhidrock, account of, ii. 380
  ―――― in Linkinhorne, ii. 380
  ―――― of Fowey, family, ii. 380
  Treffreye, i. 383.――John, defended Fowey against the French, ii. 40.
    His seat at Plase and history 43. John, Sheriff of Cornwall, Sir
    John, William and arms, these cut in Fowey church ibid.
  Treffry family, ii. 36. Thomas fortified his house 46. Mr. Sheriff
    of Cornwall 186. Mr. 279.――Elizabeth, iii. 71. John 72.
    Miss 67.――Miss, iv. 24
  Trefilis, iii. 402
  Trefreke, account of, i. 383
  Trefrew village, ii. 405
  Trefrize manor, iii. 44
  Trefronick, i. 20
  Trefry, John, iii. 347
  Trefusis, i. 125, 225, 226. James 240. Otho de 348――ii. 32. John,
    his lines on Captain Rouse 278. Rev. John 231. R. G. W. Lord Clinton
    313 _bis_, 314 _bis_.――Catherine, iii. 41. Francis 228. Mary 41.
    Nicholas 40 _bis_, 41. Otho 318. Robert 224. Miss 60. Mr. 230. Lord
    Clinton ibid. Family 40, 107, 117, 230, 254, 390. Arms 318.――Family,
    iv. 62
  ―――― of Landew, family, ii. 399
  ―――― of Trefusis, i. 65, 240. George William 151.――Richard, ii.
    304.――Bridget, Francis, iii. 62. Robert 327, 282. Samuel 227. Mr.
    382. Family and arms 227
  ―――― manor, iii. 382. Account of 226. House 227. Situation 231
  Trefyns, account of, ii. 130, 131
  Tregaga or Tresaga family, iii. 209
  ―――― house in Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 209
  Tregagle, Mr. ii. 332 _bis_, 335
  ―――― of Trevorder in St. Breock, tale of one, family, and arms, iii. 265
  Tregago or Trejago, account of, iii. 403
  ―――― castle, &c. house, iii. 403
  ―――― or Trejago, i. 117.――Jane, John de, and Stephen, iii. 211.
    Family 208 _bis_, 214
  ―――― of Tregago, family, built the castle, iii. 403
  Tregallen village, iii. 337
  Tregalravean, account of, ii. 56
  Tregameer, i. 140
  Tregamynyon, account of, iii. 242
  Treganetha, iv. 140
  Tregantle, iii. 438
  Treganyan of Treganyan, family, iii. 215
  ―――― tenement, iii. 209, 215. Etymology 212
  Tregaraan, ii. 51
  Tregaradue, ii. 50
  Tregarden, ii. 109
  Tregare, ii. 50, 275
  Tregarick of Tregarick, Matilda, Mr. and family, iii. 397
  ―――― manor, account of by Hals, iii. 396. By Whitaker 397
  Tregarne manor, ii. 320
  Tregarrick, iv. 29
  Tregarthen family, ii. 114
  Tregarthin of Court, in Brand, family, iii. 198
  Tregarthyn family, ancient and powerful, Catherine, ii. 109. Jane,
    Joan, and her epitaph 110. John 109 _bis_, 110. Margaret 109, 110.
    Mary ibid. Thomas 109 _bis_, 110. Arms 110
  Tregaseal, i. 141
  Tregavethan manor in Kenwin, iii. 192
  Tregavethick village, ii. 399
  Tregavethnan manor, account of by Hals and by Tonkin, ii. 316
  Tregavithick manor, account of, ii. 400
  Tregaza, account of, i. 394
  Tregea, of St. Agnes, John, iii. 315. William 326. Capt. William 315
  ―――― of Lambrigan, William, ii. 353
  Tregeagle, i. 18, 19. John 19.――John, ii. 338
  ―――― of Trevorden, John, iii. 76
  Tregean, Francis, ii. 354
  Tregear manor, iii. 2 _bis_
  Tregeare, account of, i. 263, 264
  ―――― of Tregeare, i. 263, 264. Richard 263. Arms 263, 264. Etymology 264
  ―――― manor, ii. 56, 336. Account of 51, 377. Geran’s parish, part of
    it 54. Purchased by Kempe 57
  Tregedick family, ii. 316
  Tregelly manor, iii. 170
  Tregembo, ii. 217, 218
  Tregena, Mr. ii. 255
  Tregenhawke, account of, ii. 252
  Tregenna, near St. Ives, ii. 215.――Mr. Stephens’s house at, i. 403
    _bis_――ii. 270. Beautiful prospect from a hill near 272.――Rev. John
    of Roach and Mawgan in Pider, iii. 139, 396 _bis_, 399. Miss, Mr.
    and family 406.――Rev. Mr. of Whitstone, iv. 152
  ―――― village, ii. 357
  Tregenno, account of, i. 421
  Tregenyn, i. 408
  Tregethes, i. 364
  Tregew, account of its possessors, ii. 30
  Tregheney Brygge, iv. 255
  Tregheny castle, iv. 228
  Tregian, account of, i. 420
  ―――― family, i. 234, 248.――Francis, ii. 353――iii. 243, 269, 355. His
    history 357 to 360. List of his lost estates 358. Francis the son
    383. His history 360. Persecution 368. Adventure 369. Jane 358. Mr.
    357 _ter._ The unfortunate 549 Mr. 405. Their posterity existing
    in Spain 361. Arms 357.――Francis, iv. 118. Margaret 72
  Tregian of Golden, i. 420
  ―――― of Walvedon, Miss, iii. 102, 103
  Tregillas, John, i. 10
  Tregion, Francis, ii. 305
  ―――― or Tregyn in St. Ewe, iii. 358
  Treglaston, iii. 350
  Tregleah, account of, i. 372
  Treglisson family, iii. 343
  Treglith, iv. 62
  Tregof, ii. 427
  Tregoll village, iii. 353
  Tregonan, i. 418. Account of 416
  Tregone tenement, iii. 223
  Tregonell, account of, i. 247
  ―――― of Middleton, John, i. 247, 248. Sir John 248
  ―――― of Tregonell, i. 247. Arms ibid.
  Tregoney or Tregony parish, iv. 115, 166
  Tregonissy, i. 49
  Tregonnan, in St. Ewe, iii. 361
  Tregonnebris, occupiers of, iii. 427
  Tregonnen village, iii. 334
  Tregonning hill, i. 128 _bis_
  Tregony borough, account of, i. 295. Arms 296.――Members for, Charles
    Trevanion, iii. 200. William Trevanion 205
  ―――― branch of Fale river, iii. 405
  ―――― bridge, i. 245, 299――iii. 207
  ―――― castle, i. 296, 299――ii. 2
  ―――― church, i. 74
  ―――― manor, i. 296
  ―――― parish, i. 242
  ―――― priory, i. 299, 300
  ―――― town, ii. 17, 180――iii. 404, 451. German school at 67
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 272, 289
  ―――― Medan, i. 294 _bis_, 297
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 297 _bis_
  Tregoos chapel, i. 218
  Tregordock manor, iv. 44
  Tregorick, i. 49
  Tregors, Andrew de, iii. 372
  Tregose, ii. 320.――Miss, iii. 421――iv. 24
  Tregoss moor, i. 230.――Moors, iv. 26
  Tregothick, i. 125
  Tregothnan, i. 140――ii. 33, 308 _bis_――iv. 167
  ―――― of Tregothnan, Johanna. John, and family, iii. 212
  Tregothnan manor, iii. 208, 209, 464. And tenement 209, 215. Gates
    and houses of 209. New house at 212. Account of ibid. Description
    221. Carried to the Boscawens 213
  Tregou village, ii. 399
  Tregoweth of Crantock, Margaret, iii. 177
  Tregoze, i. 39――ii. 130――Arms, i. 39
  Tregtheney-Pomerey castle, iv. 228
  Tregullan village, ii. 385
  Tregumbo, account of, ii. 170
  Tregurtha, ii. 218. Abounds in mines 219
  Tregury, now Tregotha, iv. 143 _bis_
  ―――― Michael de, Archbishop of Dublin, iv. 138, 141, 143, 145.
    Governor of Caen University 138, 144, 145 _bis_. His life 144.
    Ware’s mention of him 145. Buried at St. Patrick’s, Dublin 138. Tomb
    141. Epitaph 138. Death 146. Will 147. Works 148. Family, last heir
    male and three coheirs 143
  Tregwerys, or Trewerys in Probus, iii. 360
  Tregyon family, iii. 404
  Trehane barton, iii. 354, 355, 366, 367, _bis_.――Account of, i. 397
  ―――― of Trehane family, iii. 354. Arms 355
  Trehanick in St. Teath, iii. 212
  Trehavarike, account of, ii. 335
  ―――― of Trehavarike family, ii. 335
  Trehawke family, ii. 399.――Mr. a miser, iii. 19. Family and
    monuments to 20
  ―――― of Leskeard, Mrs. iv. 97
  ―――― of Trehawke, arms, iii. 169
  ―――― iii. 168, or Trehavock, account of 169
  Trehunest village, iii. 372
  Trehunsey manor, iii. 372
  Treiagu, John de, iv. 96
  Treice, Mr. ii. 87
  Treise, Sir Christopher, i. 321.――Family and heir, iv. 60
  Treiwall, ii. 208
  Trejago castle, ii. 2
  ―――― creek, ii. 2
  ―――― Jene, John de, and Stephen, iii. 211. Family 214
  Trekininge, account of, i. 219, 223
  ―――― Vean, account of, i. 225
  Trekynin, Jenkyn, iii. 318
  Trelagoe village and manor, i. 3
  Treland Vean, account of, ii. 320
  ―――― Vear, account of, ii. 320
  Trelask manor, iii. 37, 38 _bis_
  Trelauder of Hengar, family and heir, iv. 94
  Trelaun by Leland, iv. 280
  Trelawder of Hengar, or St. Mabyn family, gentlemen of blood and
    arms, their marriages and heir, arms the same as Tredinick’s, iv. 95
  Trelawn, iii. 293. History of by Bond, and house built at 295.
    Masses performed at 301
  ―――― mill, iv. 29
  ―――― wood, iv. 29
  Trelawney in Pelynt, the Hearles settled at, ii. 99
  ―――― family, i. 23. Jane 221. John 65. Sir John 221. W. S., 158.
    Arms 23.――Family, ii. 255, 309. Anna 235. Charles 77 _bis_. Edward
    ibid. Rev. Heal 394. Sir John, Sir Beville Grenville’s letter to
    349. Sir Jonathan 55, 235
  ―――― of Coldrynike, Jonathan and Major John, ii. 67
  ―――― of Lamellin, Sir John, ii. 411
  ―――― of Poble, Kent, ii. 7
  ―――― of Poole, ii. 67. John 411, 412. Sir Jonathan 16――iii. 133. Sir
    Jonathan 168. Family now of Trelawen 170. Arms 169
  ―――― of Trelawne, ii. 67
  Trelawny barton in Altarnun, account of, i. 22.――The cradle of the
    family, iii. 294
  ―――― ii. 151, 397. Rev. E., 229. Edward, Dean of Exeter 238 _bis_.
    Hele and Mr. 230.――Edward, governor of Jamaica, iii. 295 _bis_, 300.
    Rebuilt his house 295. Notice of 299. Monument to and epitaph upon
    292. Sir Harry the Roman Catholic Bishop, memoir of 300. Henry 297.
    Sir John, memoir of, couplet upon, rebuilt his house 295. Sir
    Jonathan, Bishop of Bristol, Exeter, and Winchester 248, 295 _bis_,
    296. Memoir of, one of the seven Bishops sent to the tower 296.
    Letitia 297. Rebecca 248, 249, 297. Sir William 219. Governor of
    Jamaica 300. Sir W. L. S., 301. Family 293. Name 294. Arms 295.
    Monument 292. Saying relating to the family 295.――Major-General
    Charles, governor of Plymouth, iv. 94. Sir Jonathan 34, 139. Sir
    William 37. Rev. Mr. of St. Tudy 93. Arms 96
  Trelawny of Coldrinick, John, iv. 94
  ―――― of the Lawn, Jane, and Sir John, i. 225
  ―――― of Menhynyet, iii. 168
  ―――― of Trelawny, i. 65
  Treleage manor, etymology of, ii. 319
  Trelean, account of, i. 420
  Treleare, the Editor’s farm, ii. 308
  Trelegar, ii. 54, 57. Account, of 55
  Treleigh in Redruth, iii. 359. Manor 383, 384. Account of 383
  Trelevan, iii. 125, 191. Manor 192 _bis_, 194. Occupiers of 192
  Trelevant, of St. Agnes, Hector, iii. 243
  Trelewick, account of, i. 420
  Treligan, i. 27.――Account of, ii. 54
  Trelil, ii. 139
  Trelisick, i. 418. Account of 350, 359, 417. House 359.――Account of
    and house built at, ii. 32.――Or Trelizike in St. Earth, iii. 318, 423
  Trelisike, account of, i. 348.――Or Trelizik, iii. 125
  Trelogas, account of, ii. 300
  Trelowarren, account of, iii. 133, 137
  Treloweth, i. 365. Smelting house at ibid.
  Trelowith manor, iii. 355
  Trelowthes manor, iii. 355
  Treloye chapel, i. 231
  Treluddera, Treluddero, or Treludra, iii. 267, 268, 272――iv.
    141――Rights of, ii. 271
  Treluddro in Newlyn, iii. 319
  Treludra Pippen, iii. 268――iv. 141
  Trelugan manor, ii. 363
  Treluick, account of, i. 417
  Trelven, i. 174
  Trelynike, account of, i. 379
  Tremabe, description of, i. 177
  Tremada, account of, i. 319
  Tremagenna, ii. 405
  Tremain, by Leland, iv. 270
  Tremaine church, iv. 60
  ―――― Rev. H. H. ii. 99.――William, his garden, iii. 343
  ―――― parish, iv. 61, 64, 124, 125, 127
  TREMAINE, or Tremean parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    endowment, impropriation, land tax, chapel of ease to Egloskerry,
    iv. 59. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries 59. Name, daughter to
    Egloskerry 60. By Editor, manor of Tremaine, church, its name,
    patron, impropriation, saint, his feast, statistics 60. Geology by
    Dr. Boase 61
  Tremanheer of Penzance, i. 162
  Tremarastall, ii. 169, 170
  Trematon, i. 199, 203――ii. 70.――iv. 81. By Leland 291
  ―――― castle, i. 296, 297――ii. 42
  ―――― manor, i. 296, 297――iii. 462 _bis_. History of 462
  Tremayne in Mabe, account of, iii. 60
  ―――― in St. Colomb, Major, iii. 61
  ―――― in St. Martyn’s, iii. 61, 63. Account of 124, 126
  ―――― Rev. Charles, i. 398. Rev. H. H., 423, 424. His character 423.
    John 422. John, H., 423, 424. His character 423. Lewis 420, 423. Mr.
    417. Serjeant 424.――Mr. ii. 134.――Arthur, Degory, Edmund, Edmund,
    iii. 61. John, John, John 60. J. H., 230. Rev. Nicholas, Peres de,
    Peros, Richard 60. Richard Roger 61. Thomas, Thomas, Thomas 60. Rev.
    Dr. of Menheniet 171. Miss 102. Mr. 192, 194. Family 60, 197.
    Estates increased 60
  ―――― of Collacomb, i. 416
  ―――― of Croan, H. H. and J. H. i., 377
  ―――― of St. Ewe, Sampson, senior, i. 419.――Or of Heligan or
    Halligan, in St. Ewe, J. H., iii. 240. Lewis 191, 196. Mr. 193
    _bis_. Family 61, 63, 126, 240.――Of Halliggon, Sir John, Col. Lewis,
    Rev. W. and Mr. i. 416. Of Heligan, Rev. H. H., 260, 359. John 260,
    419 _bis_. Sir John and Col. Lewis 419
  ―――― of St. Ive, i. 45
  ―――― of Sydenham, i. 201――iii. 126
  ―――― of Tremayne family, and Miss, iii. 126
  ―――― manor, iv. 60
  ―――― parish in East hundred, iii. 61
  ―――― vicarage, i. 378
  Trembath in Madern, iii. 33, 56
  Trembetha, account of, iii. 7
  Trembleth, account of, i. 405 _bis_
  ―――― chapel, i. 405
  ―――― heir of, iii. 140
  ―――― of Trembleth, arms, iii. 405. Burying place ibid.
  Tremblethick, i. 405
  Trembraze in Leskeard, iii. 209
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 209
  Tremeal, iii. 337 _bis_. House rebuilt 338
  Tremearne, Rev. John, iii. 287
  Tremeen, iv. 97
  Tremenheere, Captain H. P. character of, iii. 88. John, endowed a
    chapel at Penzance 93. Mr. 82. Family 94. Have adorned the new
    church at Penzance 93
  Tremere, account of, ii. 384
  ―――― of Tremere family, ii. 384. Alice, John, and arms 385
  Tremertoun, by Leland, iv. 281
  Tremiloret, iii. 59
  Tremle, William, iii. 115
  Tremoderet en Hell, iii. 393
  Tremogh family, iii. 62
  ―――― etymology, iii. 62. Road near 63
  Tremolesworth, i. 370
  Tremolla in Northill Linkinborne and Liskeard, iii. 359
  Tremoore village, ii. 385
  Tremough, account of, iii. 60, 62
  Tremper bridge, i. 235
  Tremporth river, i. 249. Account of its haven and bridge ibid.
  Tremyton castle, iv. 229
  Trenake, iv. 23
  Trenalt, i. 159
  Trenance, i. 41 _bis_, or Trenants, iv. 160. Account of 161 _bis_
  ―――― Lyttleton, ii. 383.――Littleton, iv. 161.――Family, ii.
    383――iv. 161
  ―――― of Black Haye, John and three daughters, and arms, iv. 161
  Trenant, i. 320. Account of 321. Sold 320
  Trenaran, account of, i. 44
  Trenarran, i. 49
  Trenawick, i. 54
  Trenchard of Collacomb, Isabel, iii. 60
  Trenchicot, ii. 427
  Trencreek, i. 207. Account of 256
  ―――― Miss, iii. 75
  ―――― of Trencreek, Robert, i. 293. Arms 256
  Trenear, possessors, iii. 88
  Trenegles, i. 197
  Treneglos church, iv. 62
  ―――― parish, iv. 59, 64 _bis_, 124, 125 _bis_, 127
  TRENEGLOS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Warbstow consolidated with
    it, iv. 61. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, etymology, ib.
    Impropriation, value of benefice, incumbent 62. By Editor, Tonkin’s
    etymology right, manor of Downeckney by Lysons, impropriation,
    patronage, statistics ibid. Incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 63
  Trenere, cellar at, ii. 138
  Trenethick, ii. 139
  Trenewan village, ii. 399
  Trenewith, by Leland, iv. 264
  Trengone, took the name of Nance, ii. 337
  Trengove, account of, iv. 128
  ―――― family, iii. 382――iv. 128, 129. Or nanc, John 129, 130. Arms 129
  ―――― of Trengove in Warlegan, family, ii. 238
  Trengreen, i. 54
  Trengwainton, iii. 289. Possessors 85
  Trenhayle, account of, i. 347
  ―――― George and Loveday, i. 357
  ―――― of Trenhayle, i. 347
  Trenheale, Rev. Reginald of Newlin, iii. 267
  Trenhorne village, iii. 38
  Trenithick or Trenithicke, account of, ii. 136, 137
  Trenorren, etymology by Tonkin, i. 47
  Trenouth, i. 221
  ―――― family, iii. 208
  ―――― of Fentongollan, Johanna and Ralph, iii. 397
  Trenoweth, i. 213
  ―――― of Bodrigan, Sir Henry, iii. 102
  ―――― of St. Colomb, Major, Miss, iii. 147. Family buried in St.
    Colomb church ibid.
  ―――― of Trenoweth, Catherine, iii. 211. John, John 211, 214.
    Margaret 211 _bis_. Maud 211. Philippa 211, 214. Family 213, 214
  ―――― lands, iii. 147
  Trenowith, i. 117.――Arms, the family changed their name to Bodrigan,
    ii. 107.――Family, iv. 71
  ―――― manor, i. 406. _See Trewithgy_
  Trenowth, arms, iv. 72
  Trenwith, account of, ii. 259, 261
  ―――― of Trenwith, i. 125――ii. 259, 260. Thomas and arms 259
  ―――― manor, iv. 52, 164
  Treonike, i. 18
  Trequanors, ii. 203, 211
  Treranell, account of, i. 405
  Treravall, i. 406
  Trereardrene, i. 12
  Trereen, Dinas, iii. 30, 34.――Described, iv. 165 _bis_.――Walk to
    church from, iii. 32
  Trereife, iii. 85
  Trerice manor, i. 20, 395――iii. 270. Sir John Arundell removed to
    274.――Cause of his removal, ii. 184
  Treridern, i. 321
  Treroach, Trecarrek or Tregarreck, iii. 391. Possessors 393
  Treruff manor, iii. 382
  Trerule fool, ii. 79
  Tresaddarne, i. 219
  Tresahar, i. 161.――Mr. ii. 11
  Tresassen, iv. 29
  Tresaster, i. 221
  Tresavren barton, iv. 4
  Tresawsen or Tresawsan, iii. 322. Account of 182
  Trescaw in Breage, ii. 217
  Trescobays, i. 136.――In Budock, iii. 248
  Trescow island, iv. 171, 172, 174. Extent of 175
  Tresilian, i. 10, 148――iii. 274
  ―――― or Tresillian bridge, i. 387――ii. 2, 17――iii. 207――iv. 76
  ―――― Sir Robert, Chief Justice, ii. 294.――Killed, iv. 16
  ―――― of Bodilly, Thomas, ii. 137
  ―――― of Roughtra, family, ii. 137
  ―――― of Tresilian, Robert, Lord Chief Justice, iii. 269
  ―――― or Tresulian, iii. 270. Manor 269
  ―――― river, iii. 180, 423
  Tresimple, account of, i. 205
  Tresinny, i. 3
  Tresithany chapel, i. 218
  Tresithney, Thomas, iii. 181. Heir of 140
  Treskeaw, i. 119
  Treskewis, Dame, iii. 60
  Tresmarrow, possessors of, iii. 337
  Tresmere parish, iv. 59, 60, 61 _bis_
  TRESMERE parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, value
    of benefice, endowment, impropriation, land tax, iv. 63. By
    Tonkin, situation, ib. Boundaries, etymology, value of benefice,
    impropriation, curate’s stipend withheld 64. By Editor, belonged
    to Launceston priory, churches served by monks, allusion to the
    “Last Minstrel” ibid. Councils ordained that each parish should
    have a resident priest, provision for them, distinction between
    vicar and perpetual curate, remark on Tonkin’s statement,
    impropriator, patron, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 65
  Tresmore manor, iv. 129
  Tresmorrow, ii. 418
  Tresona, i. 160
  Tresongar, account of, i. 383
  Tresore, iii. 77
  Tresparret Downs, ii. 88, 275
  Trespearn village, ii. 377
  Tress, ii. 151
  Tressmare, ii. 430
  Tresuggan, account of, i. 225
  Tresuran, i. 213
  Treswithan, i. 162, 163
  Trethac, i. 174
  Trethake, Matthew de, iii. 134
  Trethay, iii. 402
  Tretheage barton, iv. 2, 3. Described 4
  ―――― manor, iv. 2. Description and history of 3
  Trethergye, i. 49
  Tretheris, ruins of an ancient chapel at, i. 18
  Tretheves manor, account of, ii. 358
  Trethevye, Cromlech at, i. 193. Description of 194
  Trethewoll, account of, i. 408
  Trethewy village, iii. 337
  Trethil, iii. 440
  Trethinick, Ralph de, i. 246
  Trethurfe manor, account of, ii. 353, 354
  ―――― of Trethurfe family, and John, ii. 353. Reginald 354. Arms 353
  Trethym, i. 2, 25
  Trethyn castle, iv. 228
  Trethyrfe, Jane and Thomas, ii. 100
  ―――― of Trethyrfe, John, i. 65
  Treu-es-coit manor, iii. 64
  Treuren, by Leland, iv. 289
  Treuris, ii. 427 _bis_
  Trevadlack village, iii. 38
  Trevailer, account of, ii. 124
  Trevalaboth, ii. 203, 211
  Trevales, iv. 4
  Trevalga, i. 322――ii. 28, 235
  ―――― or Trevalgar parish, iii. 22, 232
  TREVALGA parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries,
    antiquity, value of benefice, a rectory, patrons, iv. 66. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, a rectory, and its value ibid. Manor of
    Trevalga 67. By Editor, description of the parish church, near the
    cliff, named from the manor, patrons, rector, statistics ibid.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 68
  Trevallock, i. 140
  Trevance, account of, ii. 255
  Trevanion, possessors of, iii. 199. House described 201, 202
  ―――― i. 43, 113. Joan and Sir William 65.――John, M.P. for Cornwall,
    and rhyme on his election, ii. 351. Richard 110 _ter._ Mr. 118. Sir
    H. Bodrigan’s defence against him, shares Bodrigan’s property 115.
    Newnham manor given to him 318. Mr. 414. Sir Nicholas 56. Of St.
    German’s 162. Mr. 230. Nicholas, Richard, and Richard, iv. 116
  ―――― of Carhayes, i. 298.――John, ii. 304.――Charles, iv. 156. Mr.
    45.――Or Trevenion, John, iii. 141, 226. William ibid. Family 355
  ―――― of Crego, Charles, i. 297. Attempts to make the Val navigable 298
  ―――― of Crogith, i. 299
  ―――― of Tregarthyn, i. 397.――Charles, ii. 414
  ―――― of Trelegon, Anne and Hugh, i. 302.――Or Treligan, Hugh, iii. 191
  ―――― of Trevanion and Carhayes, Amey, Charles, iii. 199. Charles 200
    _bis_, 202. Sir Charles 199, 200, 201. Hugh, Hugh, Hugh 199. Sir
    Hugh, his sword 206. John 141. John 199. John 200. John and John
    improved Trevanion 201. John, a letter from 204. Colonel John 200,
    201. Colonel John, his death 204. J. T. P. B., 205 _bis_. Richard
    201. William 199, 201, 205 _bis_. Sir William, Sir William 199. Mr.
    and Rev. Mr. 200. Family 199, 203. Sided with Henry 7th 204. Arms
    200. Monuments 206
  ―――― of Trevorter, ii. 304. Alice ibid. John 304 _bis_. John and
    Mary ibid.
  ―――― of Trevoster, Alice and John, iii. 213
  Trevannance barton, i. 8. Etymology 8 and 9. Possessors 9. House
    taken down 10
  ―――― harbour, i. 11
  Trevannion family, ii. 395
  ―――― of Caryhaes, i. 43.――Of Caryhays, ii. 54, 55, 110. Charles 111
    _ter._
  ―――― of Trelegar, ii. 54, 57
  ―――― of Treligan, ii. 54. Hugh 51, 54, 55 _ter._ His lawsuit 51
  Trevanthions family, ii. 128
  Trevarnoe, occupiers of, iii. 446
  Trevartea, Onesa, iii. 60
  Trevarthen, account of, ii. 218
  Trevarthian, Miss and Mr. iii. 423
  Trevascus, account of, i. 114
  Trevasens, account of, i. 113
  Trevassack, iii. 342
  Treveale family, iii. 442
  Treveally, John, i. 119
  Trevear, account of, iii. 429
  Treveares, iv. 45
  Trevedarne in Buryan, iii. 134
  Treveeg, account of, ii. 86
  Trevega, iv. 157
  Treveleck, account of, i. 254
  Trevelga parish, iv. 42
  Trevelisick Wartha, i. 417
  ―――― Wollas, i. 417
  Trevella, William de, iii. 442 _bis_
  Trevellance or Trefelens, ii. 326, 327. Account of 326
  Trevellans, alias Nicholas, alias Williams, John and Nicholas, iii. 318
  Trevelles, i. 8――iii. 326. In St. Agnes 327
  Trevellick, account of, i. 257
  Trevellva, account of, iii. 237
  Trevelver, iii. 240
  Trevelyan, iv. 114
  ―――― family, iii. 117, 126, 215, 309 _bis_. Wonderful tale of their
    ancestor 309, 310. Heiress 215.――Lord Chief Justice, iv. 114, and
    family 114 _ter._
  ―――― of Nettlecombe, Somersetshire, Sir John, iii. 307, 311. Family
    307, 238
  Trevemper bridge, iii. 275
  Trevena barton, iv. 20
  Treveneage 170, 217 _bis_. Account of 170. Abounds in mines 219
  Trevener, Rev. John, i. 260
  Treveniel, ii. 229
  Trevenin tenement, iii. 223
  Trevenion barton, ii. 114
  Trevenna, i. 340
  Trevennen, account of, ii. 113
  Trevenner, Mr. ii. 414
  Trevenny parish, iv. 120
  Trevenor family, ii. 357
  Trevenson, ii. 241 _bis_
  Treveor, account of by Tonkin, ii. 113. By the Editor 114
  Treveor of Treveor, Sir Henry, ii. 113
  Treverbyn manor, i. 42. Etymology ibid.
  ―――― of Treverbyn, i. 41, 42. Hugh and Katherine 43. Walter 43, 44.
    Sir Walter 44
  ―――― burying place, i. 42
  Treveres, account of, ii. 279
  Trevernon, iii. 239
  Trevery, ii. 126――iii. 127
  Treveryan, iv. 109
  Trevethen of Porthcothen, iii. 177
  Trevethey stone, i. 194. Etymology 195
  Trevethow, iii. 9. Account of 11
  Trevia, ii. 405
  Treviderow manor, iii. 250
  Trevidror, i. 148
  Trevilan farm, chapel at, iii. 335
  Treviles or Trefilies, iv. 117
  Trevilian bridge, iii. 189
  ―――― Mr. of Devon, ii. 251. Chief Justice 153――iv. 36.――Family, iii. 216
  ―――― manor, iv. 124
  ―――― river, i. 202
  Trevilion, Mr. ii. 261, 269
  Trevill of Plymouth, i. 348
  Treville family, ii. 252, 397. Richard 252. William de 156
  Trevillian, i. 36――iii. 125. Sir John 306. Mr. 116, 124, 128. Mrs. 421
  ―――― of Basill, i. 198, 199, 200. Sir John, anecdote of 200. Peter
    198, 199. Arms 198
  ―――― of Nettlecomb, John, i. 198 _bis_, 200
  ―――― of Somersetshire family, iv. 39
  Trevillis village, iii. 348
  Trevilload, i. 348
  Trevillon, account of, i. 400
  Trevingy, Reginald, iii. 387
  Trevisa, Charles, iii. 163. John translated the Bible and other
    books 163
  ―――― John, his King Arthur, i. 337
  ―――― of Crockaddon, James, i. 313. John, translator of the Bible,
    and arms 314
  ――――’s and Tindall’s translation of the Bible, i. 121
  Trevisick, i. 11, 418
  Trevithick, account of, i. 223, 234, 416
  ―――― Richard improver of steam engine, i. 164
  Trevocar Winoe, iv. 155
  Trevor, Captain Tudor, R.N. ii. 32――iii. 186. Judge 144
  Trevorder, account of, i. 117
  ―――― Bickin, i. 117
  Trevorick, ii. 255
  Trevorike, account of, ii. 255
  Trevorter, account of, ii. 304
  Trevorva, etymology, &c., iii. 355
  ―――― of Trevorva, family and heir, iii. 356
  Trevosa barton, account of, iii. 175
  ―――― head in St. Merryn, iii. 241, 282. Interesting 180. Latitude
    and longitude 281
  ―――― manor, iii. 75, 175. Possessors of 178
  Trevygham, iii. 22
  Trevyrick, iii. 269
  Trewalda, ii. 145
  Trewan, i. 227
  Trewane, account of, ii. 338
  Trewaras head, i. 129
  Trewardevi, i. 236. Account of 237
  Trewardreath, ii. 391
  Trewardreth, by Leland, iv. 289
  Trewardreva, in Constantine, iii. 427
  Trewardruth priory, i. 307
  Trewedeneck, by Leland, iv. 272
  Treweeke barton, iv. 4, 136
  ―――― Rev. George, ii. 250.――Of Illogan and St. Minver, iii. 239,
    241. Rev. Mr. 396. Of Roach 391, 399
  Treween, i. 25
  Treweere, account of, i. 391
  Trewen manor, account of, ii. 397
  TREWEN parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, impropriation, land tax, fair, Polyvant, iv. 68. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, name by Whitaker 69. By Editor,
    belonged to St. German’s priory, an appendix to South Petherwin,
    impropriation, and patronage, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 70
  Trewenethick in St. Agnes, Bartholomew, and Joan de, iii. 315
  Trewenn, i. 21. Account of 320
  ―――― parish, i. 377――iii. 335, 457
  Trewenter, ii. 427
  Trewer manor, account of, ii. 397
  Trewergy, i. 318. Account of 321
  Trewerne, Rev. Mr. of Withiel, iv. 161
  Trewhele, account of, i. 391
  Trewheler, i. 387
  Trewhella, Christopher and John, iv. 55
  Trewhelow, James, iv. 55
  Trewhythenick, account of, i. 207
  ―――― copper mill, i. 364 _bis_
  ―――― arms, i. 207
  Trewin, William, ii. 160
  Trewinard, i. 125, 344, 360. Account of 344, 349, 356. Etymology
    350――iii. 112.――House improved by Mr. C. Hawkins, i. 358.――In St.
    Earth, iii. 367
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 267
  ―――― chapel, i. 345
  ―――― i. 118, 136 _bis_, 301. Joseph 137. Arms 136.――Rev. Mr. ii. 80,
    127.――Rev. James of St. Martin’s in Meneage, iii. 124, 126, 128.
    Rev. Mr. of Mawnan 75
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 344, 350, 351. Deiphobus, killed a man,
    obtained the royal pardon by conveying all his estates to Sir
    Reginald Mohun 345. Was tried and convicted 346. Lived on small
    stipend from Sir Reginald ibid. Tradition of the murder 356. A
    descendant of Trewinard living lately in the Strand ibid. Rev.
    James, and Sir James 350. John M.P. arrested for debt 344, 356.
    Martin 345, 350. William 350. Arms 346
  Trewince, ii. 5, 54. Account of 57, or Trefynns 133
  Trewiney, iii. 194
  Trewinn parish, iv. 50, 51
  Trewinneck, iv. 96
  Trewinnow, i. 257
  Trewinnock, i. 404
  Trewint, i. 25.――In Lesnewith, iii. 132. Account of 170
  Trewish, i. 196
  Trewithan, iii. 356――iv. 139. Account of 367
  Trewithenike, account of, i. 243 _bis_. House improved 245
  Trewithgy, Trenoweth, or Treworgy, in Probus, iii. 355, 358, 365
  Trewithian, ii. 55 _bis_. Account of 54. Its possessors 58
  Trewolla family, built a pier at Mevagissey, iii. 192.――John, ii.
    111 _ter._ Family and arms 110
  ―――― or Trewoolla of Trewoolla, or Trewolla in St. Goran, iii. 191,
    192 _bis_
  Trewollea, ii. 230
  Trewoofe manor, i. 142
  ―――― of Trewoofe, i. 142, and arms 142
  Trewoola account of, ii. 110
  Trewoolla, arms of, i. 206
  Trewoon in Budock, iii. 61
  Trewoone manor, account of, iii. 196, 197
  Treworder, i. 367
  Treworell, ii. 430
  Treworgan, i. 207. Account of 396, 403
  ―――― Vean, account of, i. 396
  Treworgy, ii. 87. _See Trewithgy_
  ―――― parish, ii. 391
  Treworgye, i. 316. Described 177
  Trework, George of Penzance, ii. 218
  Treworock, i. 418. Described 177
  Treworrell village, iii. 22
  Trewortha Vean, occupants of, iii. 188
  Treworthen, John, i. 241
  ―――― of Treworthen, Sir John, Sir Otho, and Walter, family and arms,
    iii. 269
  ―――― manor, iii. 269
  Treworthgy, ii. 429
  Treworthy, account of, iii. 383
  Treworveneth, iii. 288
  Trewother, iii. 355
  Trewothike, account of, i. 39
  Trewred manor, iv. 70
  Trewren, i. 260. Arms 237.――Rev. Richard of Withiel, iv. 162, 163
    _bis_. His wife and two daughters 163
  ―――― of Drift, Mr. and family, iii. 427
  ―――― of Tredreva in Constantine, iv. 163
  ―――― of Trewardreva, i. 237, 241――iv. 3.――Catherine, i. 376. John
    237. Rev. Richard 376
  Trewret barton, iv. 70
  Trigantan, i. 258
  Trigg, Rev. Mr. of Warliggon, iv. 128
  ―――― hundred, i. 129, 153――ii. 151, 332, 394――iii. 64, 237――iv. 42,
    44, 48, 49, 93, 95
  ―――― Major hundred, or Trigmajorshire, i. 60, 377――ii. 86, 232, 273,
    274, 402――iv. 12 _bis_, 15, 50, 101, 131.――Divided into Strathan and
    Lesnewith, iii. 22
  Trigminorshire, i. 367, 382――ii. 49, 274 _bis_, 402 _ter._――iv. 66,
    93.――Why so called, i. 60
  Trigonometrical survey, i. 149――ii. 359――iii. 98, 281, 432――iv. 31
  Trinity in Lanlivery, ii. 393
  ―――― Chantry in St. Colomb Major, i. 214
  ―――― chapel at Restormel, i. 338
  ―――― college, Cambridge, iii. 95, 188
  ―――― college, Dublin, library of, iv. 147
  ―――― college, Oxford, iii. 86, 258
  ―――― house, iii. 378.――Corporation, character of, ii. 359
  Trink, iii. 7
  Trion, St. i. 341
  Tripcony, i. 136.――John, ii. 119 _bis_, 120. Mr. 110, 414. Arms 124
  Trist, Miss, i. 401.――Rev. Jeremiah, iv. 122. Rev. S. P. J., 122,
    123 _ter._
  Triste, i. 164
  Tristram, Sir, ii. 308
  Trivalis castle, King Richard confined at, ii. 178
  Troad, Thomas, iii. 256, 350
  Trojan war, i. 342
  Trout, disquisition on the relative merits of, iii. 442
  Trove, i. 142
  Trowall or Truth well, ii. 219
  Trowbridge, of Trowbridge in Devon, Catherine and John, ii. 339
  Trowell farm, ii. 83――iii. 47
  Trowis, German, i. 192
  Trowse, i. 348
  Troy, iii. 418, 420.――Chronicles, and wars of, abridged, iv. 141
  Troyes, Lupus Bishop of, ii. 64
  Truan, account of, i. 221
  Trubody, ii. 36.――Charles, i. 44
  ―――― of Treworock, i. 177, 178
  Trungle, iii. 288
  Trewrew castle, iv. 228
  Truro, Baron, ii. 380
  ―――― borough, corporation of, ii. 81. M.P. for, Colonel John Lemon
    ibid.――John Lemon, iii. 229――iv. 33.――Kelland Courtenay, ii.
    385.――Henry Vincent, iii. 191
  ―――― bridge, iii. 207
  ―――― church, Mr. Lemon buried at, ii. 85
  ―――― manor, ii. 31
  ―――― and Tregrewe manor, in Themwyn and Truro, iii. 359
  ―――― parish, ii. 298, 301, 302, 315
  TRURO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, sea flows to the
    walls, two manors at the conquest, iv. 70. Value of benefice,
    incorporation, patron, incumbent, land tax, arms of King John in
    the church windows, also the Prince of Wales’s plume 71. Manor and
    royalty attached to the rectory, erection of the church, no tower
    or steeple, benefice chiefly consists of voluntary subscriptions
    72. Question of its expediency, monument to John Robartes, and to
    three brothers, Dominican chapel, nunnery of Clares called Anhell,
    town a coinage town, charter of Elizabeth 73. Constitution and
    arms of the borough, form of writ, birthplace of Lord Robarts,
    fairs and cheap markets, Custom House, chief inhabitants, wealth,
    and fine buildings, Captain Upcott 74. By Tonkin and Whitaker,
    situation and boundaries, Tonkin’s etymology from Camden, rejected
    by Whitaker, a rectory, value, patron 75. Incumbent, site of the
    town, from Leland, two brooks, the three streets and three
    churches, coinage, the town a borough, the castle, small creek,
    Tonkin’s commentary on this description, and Whitaker’s on his 76.
    View from the castle, no remains of it, incorporation, seal,
    principal burgesses, mayor is also mayor of Falmouth 77. By
    Whitaker, town named from the castle, which belonged to the Earls
    of Cornwall, nothing but the mount or keep remaining, gave origin
    to the town 78. Seated on the westerly current, etymology,
    supposed rise and progress of the town 79. New way to Kenwin
    church, new bridge, anticipated act of parliament for
    improvements, church first dedicated to St. Pancras, now to St.
    Mary 80. Architecture of the church, castle later than the
    conquest, built by one of the Norman Earls, town in possession of
    Richard de Lacy a century after the conquest 81. Privileged as a
    borough, charter lost, but confirmed by Reginald Fitzroy Earl of
    Cornwall 82. The seal, the charter 83. Confirmed by Henry II. the
    mayor still mayor also of Falmouth, town has superiority over
    Falmouth harbour 84. By Editor, Truro allowed to be the first town
    in Cornwall, leads in all county concerns, the school and its
    masters, Dr. Jane, Dean of Gloucester 85. Epigram upon, Truro has
    produced Mr. Polwhele and Sir Hussey Vivian, and in the 16th
    century the learned Farnaby 86. His death, and works, Boyle’s
    character of him 87. Several families have made large fortunes
    there, the Robarteses Earls of Radnor, the Vincents 88. Mr.
    Gregor, Mr. Lemon, Mr. Coster, Mr. Daniel, Mr. Vivian, Mr. Hussey
    89. Mr. Thomas, Samuel Foote, tragedy in his mother’s family of
    which he published a narrative, the two Landers, a monument to one
    90. Mr. Charles Warrick invented and used the paddle wheel for
    boats, modern changes, specimen 91. Statistics, rector, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 92
  Truro river, i. 202――ii. 33
  ―――― new road, iii. A 89.――Road from Redruth, ii. 304
  ―――― school, ii. 355
  ―――― town, i. 58 _bis_, 77, 84, 177――ii. 2, 17, 34, 84, 304, 318,
    354, 379, 381, 388――iii. 16, 18, 38, 189, 196, 324 _bis_, 367――iv.
    30, 167. A coinage town, ii. 301. Ferry to 212. Passage from
    Falmouth to 226. Road to Falmouth from 304.――Road to Helston from,
    iv. 4.――Ships obliged to go up to, ii. 9. The old part is in Kenwyn
    parish 317. Assizes removed to 431. People of 85. Road through to
    Falmouth 104.――A family of, iii. 213
  Truru, by Leland, iv. 272
  Truthan, account of, i. 396, 403
  Truthon, i. 398 _bis_
  Try, ii. 124
  Trywardreth river, source of, iv. 237
  Tubb, Agnes and Charles, ii. 395. Family ibid.――iii. 129 _bis_
  Tubby, i. 276 _bis_, 277 _quat._
  Tuckfield, John, ii. 296
  Tudor, Mary, iii. 369. House of 370.――Race of, ii. 381
  ―――― times, ii. 114――iii. 8
  Tudy, St. i. 129, 131
  ―――― St. manor, iv. 97
  ―――― St. parish, iv. 44
  TUDY, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, antiquity,
    value of benefice, incumbent, land tax, history of St. Udith,
    reproved for her fine dress, her answer, iv. 93. Hengar, Penvose,
    Dameliock castle 94. The castle defaced, Billing family 95. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of benefice, patron, incumbents
    ibid. Tinten manor, Tynten family 96. By Editor, splendid monuments
    in the church, one to Mr. A. Nicoll, St. Editha, died early at
    Wilton, was very self-denying, Canute’s opinion of her ibid. The
    opening of her tomb convinced him, patrons of the benefice, present
    incumbent, soil, face of the land, the manor, and those of Tinten
    and Kellygreen, Tremeer, Sir William Lower’s works 97. Those of Dr.
    Lower his brother, description of Hengar and the scenery around,
    statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 98
  Tue, St. i. 251, 294
  Tunbridge, ii. 295
  ―――― castle, ii. 424
  Tunnel rock, iii. 36
  Turbervill, James, Bishop of Exeter, i. 108, 109
  Turks, i. 130, 411 _bis_――iv. 148.――War with, ii. 371. Subdued
    Constantinople 365. Conspired with Demetrius Paleolagus 366
  Turner, Francis, Bishop of Ely, iii. 299
  Turner’s wear, ii. 1, 17 _bis_
  Turvey, ii. 292
  Tutbury castle, Staffordshire, ii. 89
  Twickenham, Pope’s grotto at, iii. 53
  Twysden, Judge, ii. 5
  Tybesta, i. 253, 256, 258, 297. Described 253
  ―――― chapel, i. 253
  ―――― manor, iii. 195
  Tyburn, ii. 191
  Tye family, iii. 90
  Tyer family, iii. 84
  Tyes, Sir Henry le, Lord T. (or de Tiers), iii. 314
  Tyhiddy, ii. 235 _bis_, 239 _ter._ Account of by Hals 235. By Tonkin
    238, 239. By the Editor 240
  Tyhiddy downs, ii. 235
  Tyncombe, Mr. ii. 43.――Rev. Mr. iv. 110
  Tyndall’s Bible, iii. 163 _bis_
  Tyne river, i. 2.90
  Tyngmouth river, source of, iv. 237
  Tynnyherne, ii. 430
  Tyntagell castle, iv. 228
  Tynten, John de, _ter._ and family, iv. 96
  Typpet of St. Colomb, Matthew, Richard, and arms, iv. 139
  Tywardreath, or Tywardreth monastery, iii. 7――ii. 9
  Tywardreth, or Tywardreath parish, i. 52, 167――ii. 36, 44, 88, 89
    _bis_, 92, 390――iii. 55, 56
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 275
  TYWARDRETH parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, and land tax, the
    priory alien, iv. 99. History of the saints Sergius and Bacchus,
    founders of the abbey, dedicated to St. Andrew, his history 100.
    Alien priories suppressed, this an exception, its revenues at the
    general dissolution, account of Menabilly 101. Castle Dore 102. By
    Tonkin, situation, late incumbent, value of benefice, manor,
    belonged time of Henry IV. to the Champernowns, given by the
    conqueror to Robert, Earl of Morton, Leland’s description of the
    town, &c., 102. By the Editor, antiquity of the church and its
    tower, interior decorations, alteration of churches, the different
    purposes to which they are now destined, the monastery has
    disappeared 103. Description from the foundations, which could be
    discovered by digging 104. Charter, the convent seal, St. Andrew’s
    relics brought to Abernethy in Scotland, now St. Andrew’s, priory
    suppressed with other alien houses, but re-established,
    correspondence between Thomas Cromwell and the last prior 105.
    Preserved at Wardour, its nature 106. History of the manor,
    Menabilly, Rashleigh family 107. Mr. Rashleigh’s collection of
    minerals, and published account of them, with a geological plate,
    representing a stream-work, destroyed soon after, his grotto and
    death 108. Polkerris, improvements in, Kilmarth, Treveryan,
    statistics, vicar, patron 109. Geology by Dr. Boase, mines of
    Lanescot, and Fowey consols 110
  ―――― priory, ii. 45, 113――iii. 56, 232 _quat._――iv. 62, 64, 127.――The
    manor taken from, ii. 46; or abbey, its founder, dedicated to St.
    Andrew, not suppressed, iv. 101. Communication respecting it in
    the Gentleman’s Magazine, suppressed, but re-established 105.
    Extracts from its calendar 106.――Prior of, i. 41, 42, 52, 414――ii.
    36, 38, 89――iii. 195――iv. 63 _bis_, 64; or abbot 99 _bis_. List of
    the priors 106.――Curious letter to one, ii. 47
  Tywarnhaile manor, i. 12――iii. 316, 327. Account of 313. House 314
  ―――― Tier’s manor, iii. 313 _bis_, 314, 316, 327. Account of 314
  Tywarnhayle, ii. 130
  Tywednick parish, ii. 257 _bis_, 258 _bis_
  Tywidneck, iv. 164
  Tywoodreth river, source of, iv. 237

  Udith, or Udye, St. her history, disputation with Bishop Ethelwold
    about female attire, iv. 93. Her brother Edward the martyr, her
    death, built St. Denis’s church at Wilton, called the younger, her
    aunt was another St. Udith 94
  Udnow Parva, iii. 306
  Udy, i. 61
  ―――― St. iv. 42
  Udye, St. parish, i. 60――iii. 64, 222
  Uffa, Lieutenant of Devonshire, iii. 415
  Ugbere, or Ogbere tenement, iv. 41
  Ulette, St. i. 341
  Ulex nanus, iv. 54
  Ulster, king of arms, iv. 144
  Umphravill, Mr. ii. 146.――Alicia, and John, her husband, iii. 140.
    Family, ib.
  Underhill, Thomas, ii. 192
  Union, Scotch, i. 126
  United Kingdom, various measures in, iii. 433
  ―――― States, iii. 89
  Universal history, ii. 368
  Unwena, Bishop of Dorchester, iv. 137
  Uny, St. iii. 5 _bis_, 7 _ter._, 384 _bis_. Buried at Lelant 7.――Or
    Unan, name explained, iv. 313
  Uny, Lelant parish, iii. 5
  Upcott, George and Jonathan, i. 45.――Joseph of Morval, iv. 187.
    William of Truro, ib. Captain William, memoir of 74
  Upton barton overwhelmed in sand, ii. 149
  ―――― Nicholas, iii. 437――iv. 71.――His MS. of heraldry, i. 170,
    338――ii. 107――iv. 71.――Family, iii. 38 _bis_, 148――iv. 156
  ―――― of Upton and Colombton, iv. 156
  ―――― of St. Winow, heir of, iv. 156
  ―――― de re Militari, iv. 141
  Urban, Mr. iii. 143
  Urchuarth, Miss, i. 244
  Urlick, Mr. and Mr. iii. 88
  Urns, found at Dance-Meyns, i. 141. At Trembleth 405
  Urny, St. iii. 461
  Uro, R. iv. 79
  Ursan of Richardock, i. 330 _bis_, 331, 332
  Ursula, St. story and picture of, i. 195
  Ursula’s, St. tomb, i. 195
  Ushant, ii. 246
  Usher’s, Archbishop, iii. 331, 332.――Brit. Eccles. Antiq. &c. i. 83,
    321.――“De Christ. Eccles.” &c. iii. 257.――His account of St. Kebius,
    ii. 338
  Ustick, i. 144, 371, 376 _bis_. Oliver 145.――Family, iii.
    216.――Stephen, iv. 4
  ―――― of Bideford, Michael, i. 375
  ―――― of Botallock, ii. 285 _bis_
  ―――― of Lea, Oliver, i. 376
  ―――― of Pendavy, Richard, i. 376
  ―――― of Pendevey, Mrs. iv. 163
  ―――― of Penzance, Mr. ii. 34
  Usticke, Rev. Mr. iii. 77. Miss 85
  Uter Pendragon, King, i. 326, 339, 342――iv. 94.――His history, i.
    326. Death 332. Arms 326
  Uthno manor, iii. 307 _bis_
  Uxellodunum, iii. 25 _bis_.――Mentioned by Cæsar, ii. 237
  Uzella, iii. 24 _bis_, 25, 26
  ―――― river, iii. 24

  Vabe, La, or St. parish, _see Mabe_
  Vacye tenement, iv. 41
  Val river, i. 74, 294, 297. Attempts of Mr. Trevanion to make it
    navigable 298
  Valancey bridge, ii. 50
  Vale river, i. 242, 253, 256, 258――ii. 1 _ter._, 17, 24, 298――iii.
    402 _bis_
  ―――― Royal abbey, Cheshire, iii. 232
  Valemouth, ii. 1
  Valerian, Emperor, i. 88
  Valerianus, Emperor, iii. 434
  Valgenow, ii. 1
  Valle, abbey de, i. 300 _bis_
  Valletort, Valitort, or Valletorta, i. 36. Joan, ib. Reginald de 42.
    Roger de Lord of Trematon castle 296.――Jane de, ii. 8. Joan de 109.
    Reginald de 119.――Joan de, iii. 448.――Roger de, iv. 41, 77, 82
  Valmune, ii. 1
  Valor Beneficiorum, ii. 30, 34, 86, 89, 232, 273――iv. 185
  ―――― Ecclesiasticus, ii. 412――iii. 253, 278, 453 _ter._――iv. 4, 5, 69
  Valuba, supposed to be Falmouth, ii. 20
  Valubia, i. 28
  Van Tromp defeated by Blake, and his subsequent victory, ii.
    25.――His death 27
  Vandals, i. 334
  Vandower, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Vane, Sir Henry, i. 314
  Vann family, iv. 121
  Vanstort, ii. 153
  Varfull, account of, iii. 44
  Vasnoom, Rev. Mr. ii. 384
  Vatican at Penzance, iii. 89
  Vaughan, Rev. Thomas, i. 300.――John, iii. 185. Mr. 166
  ―――― of Ottery, John, i. 39. Arms 39
  ―――― of Trewothick and Ottery, i. 371
  Vaultershome, iii. 107
  Vaux of Northamptonshire, family, iii. 404, 405
  Vaye, St. manor, iii. 222
  Vaynfleet, Oller, iv. 55
  Veal, Mr. ii. 150.――Family, iv. 54
  Veale family, and George, ii. 124. Rev. Mr. 124 _bis_. Rev. Mr. the
    first protestant vicar of Gulval 124.――George, iii. 88. Mr. 82.
    Family 94, 286.――Sampson, iv. 55. Rev. W. of Zennar 166
  ―――― of Trevarla, George and Mr. iii. 91
  Vean, John, Robert, iii. 387
  Veep, or Veepe, St. parish, i. 319――ii. 394, 409――iv. 155, 159
  VEEP, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, impropriation,
    founder of church, ancient name, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, impropriation, iv. 110. Land tax, Priory of Carock, St.
    Pile, Walter of Exeter lived there, wrote the Life of Guy Earl of
    Warwick, different opinions of the historian, new house, burying
    place converted into a garden, Botowne 111. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, ib. A vicar, value, patron, impropriation, manor of
    Manely 112. By Editor, situation of the church, monuments, St.
    Syriac priory, for two monks only, and St. Currie church ibid.
    Revenue of the priory, St. Cyric’s Creek, the saint buried on the
    site now called St. Cadix, the history of Earl Guy 113. Trevelyan,
    the family seated in Somersetshire, and have lost half this estate,
    several manors mentioned by Lysons, besides Manely Coleshill,
    patronage of the benefice, present incumbent 114. Part of King
    Charles’s army here at the surrender of Fowey, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 115
  Velhuish, Mr. ii. 97
  Vellawrance, iii. 343
  Vellownoweth, iii. 319
  Venables, iii. 85
  Venetians attacked Patras, ii. 369. Sale of Thessalonica to 366. Sir
    Henry Killigrew, ambassador to 372
  Venice, iii. 187
  Vennefire, ii. 209
  Venning, Richard, iv. 18
  Venton, ii. 1――iv. 41
  Venus, planet, transit of, observed, iii. 19.――By Dr. Maskelyne, ii.
    222.――Observation interrupted by a storm, iv. 11
  Verbena chamoidryoides, iv. 183
  ―――― pulchella, iv. 183
  Vere, John de, i. 262. John, Earl of Oxford 402. John 12th Earl,
    John 14th Earl, Richard 11th Earl, and Sir Robert 262.――Aubrey,
    son of the 12th Earl of Oxford, attainted, and beheaded, ii. 182.
    George, brother of the 13th Earl 185. Earls of Oxford, Richard
    11th, John 12th 181 _bis_. Opposed the precedence of the spiritual
    lords 181. Attainted and beheaded 182. John 13th, adhered to Henry
    6th at the battle of Barnet, fled to Mount’s bay ibid. Entered it
    by stratagem 183. Twice repulsed Edward’s forces 184. Capitulated,
    confined at Hamms, returned with Henry 7th, killed at Bosworth
    185. John 14th, and his arms, ib. Richard, and Aubrey, last Earl
    195.――Richard de 11th Earl, iii. 65, 274. Family of the Earls of
    Oxford 258
  ―――― river in Herts, iv. 79
  Vergilia capensis, iv. 183
  Verian, Veryan, or St. Verian parish, ii. 50――iii. 198, 282, 402,
    403, 404, 451――iv. 116
  Verman, i. 387――ii. 25. Family 357. Monuments to in Lamaran church
    357.――Miss, iv. 116
  Vernoil, ii. 179
  Vernon, Judge, iii. 144
  Veronica, St. i. 315
  Verstegan, i. 302――ii. 236, 320.――His rhyme, iv. 128.――Richard, i. 264
  Verulam, the ancient name of St. Alban’s, ii. 64
  Veryan limestone, iv. 123 _bis_
  VERYAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, iv. 115. Ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, name of Elerchy, history
    of the Trevanion family 116. And of Robins, with their arms, manors
    of Treviles and Govile 117. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, name, history of St. Symphorian, a vicarage, value ibid.
    Patron, incumbent, impropriation, ancient name, manor of Elerchy,
    etymology 118. By Whitaker, name derived from the manorial house,
    its situation ibid. The mills, derivation of the name, dissertation
    on the use of imagination in antiquarian researches ibid. Saint,
    corruption of his name, parish feast 120. The church tower a later
    addition 121. By Editor, the manor, impropriators and patrons ibid.
    Three vicars related, the parish mentioned in an old charter,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 122. And by the Editor 123. Mr.
    Trist’s account of the limestone, Pendower beach, analysis of the
    stone by Mr. Gregor, much superior to the Plymouth limestone ibid.
    Good for cement, contains iron, Mr. Greenough’s map 124
  Veryon, ii. 79
  Vespasian, Emperor, i. 198
  Vestia lycioides, iv. 283
  Vetorio Capelli, a Venetian general, ii. 369
  Veye, St. i. 328
  Vibart of Gulval, ii. 83. Isabel 83
  Vibert, Mr. a benefactor to the church at Penzance, iii. 93
  Victor 2nd Pope, i. 110 _bis_
  Victory man of war, wreck of, iv. 174
  Viel, heir of, iii. 279
  Vienna, Christendom preserved by John Sobieski, under the walls of,
    ii. 351
  Vignierius, i. 192
  Vigures, Hugh, ii. 423
  Ville Frank, taken by the English, iv. 177
  Villie, De, i. 296
  Villiers, Harriet, and John Earl Grandison, i. 69.――Barbara, Duchess
    of Cleveland, ii. 11. George Duke of Buckingham 382
  Vincent, i. 18, 292. Henry and S. V., 54.――John and Matthias, ii.
    227. Walter, killed Mr. George Killigrew, was tried and acquitted 5.
    Died suddenly 6. Walter 316. Mr. 227. Mrs. aunt of Mr. Tonkin 98.
    Arms, and story of them 227.――Family, made a fortune at Truro, iv.
    88. Represented it in parliament, lived at Tresimple, have
    disappeared 89
  ―――― of St. Allen, i. 205
  ―――― of Creed, ii. 90
  ―――― of Nantellon, John, i. 257
  ―――― of Stoke Dabernon, Surrey, family and arms, ii. 227
  ―――― of Trelevan family, iii. 192, 193.――Henry, ii. 55
  ―――― of Tresimple, Edward, Henry, Jane, Mary, Peter, Shadrack,
    Walter _bis_, and arms, i. 205.――Henry, ii. 317――iii. 188, 328. Mary
    188. Walter 328
  ―――― of Trigowethan, Walter, iii. 319
  ―――― of Truro, Edward, iii. 238. Nicholas 192. Walter 192, 327 _bis_
  Vinicombe, John, biography of, iii. 87
  Vinsam, Richard, i. 272, 275
  Virgil, notes on, iv. 87
  Virgin Mary, ii. 2, 96 _bis_――iv. 132. Truro church, dedicated to 75
  Virginia, Sir Richard Grenville undertakes to people, ii. 342
  ―――― fleet, the Dutch attempt to capture, its cargo landed at Foy,
    ii. 42
  Vivian, i. 74, 222. Sir Hussey 173. John 2, 215. Matthew 2. Sir
    Richard 222. Thomas, prior of Bodmin 75, 233. Bishop of Megara 75.
    Tomb 75, 95, 101. His official arms 75. Family arms 76, 94.――Edward,
    ii. 303. General Sir Hussey 34. His ancestors lived at Comprigney
    318. Jane 304. Ralph 398. Rev. Mr. 34.――Francis and Mary, iii. 135.
    Richard 387. Thomas, prior of St. Petroc’s, Bodmin, and Bishop of
    Megara in Greece 279――iv. 160.――Mr. iii. 147.――Sir Hussey originated
    from Truro, iv. 86. John 89. Family 139
  ―――― of Pencalerick, iii. 341.――Mr. iv. 89
  ―――― of Trelowarren, iv. 160
  ―――― of Trenowith, ii. 303
  ―――― of Trenowth in St. Colomb, ii. 335 _bis_. Thomas 335
  ―――― of Truan, i. 221, 383, 408. Anne 221, 222. Francis 216, 221,
    222. Jane 221, 222. John 216 _bis_, 221 _ter._, 222 _bis_. Mary 211,
    222 _bis_. Thomas 216, 221 _bis_, 222. Capt. Thomas 211. Arms
    222.――Family, ii. 43――iii. 148 _bis_――iv. 138 _bis_, 160 _bis_.
  Vivyan of Tollskiddy, ii. 255
  Volant, John de, ii. 209
  Voluba, i. 256
  Vorch, St. ii. 391 _bis_
  Vosper, i. 142――ii. 300.――Arthur, i. 142, 143.――John, iii.
    16.――Etymology, i. 143
  Vowell, i. 108
  Voysey, John, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 195
  Vyel of Trevorder, Miss, iii. 134
  Vyell, i. 117
  ―――― of Trevorder, i. 250. Julyan and William 378
  Vyvyan, i. 117, 209. Francis 248. Sir Vyell 101. Sir Francis and
    Jane, ii. 320. Sir Richard, M.P. for Cornwall 351.――Sir Francis, iv. 162
  Vyvyan of Cosowarth, in Little Colan, Mary, iii. 136
  ―――― of Merthin, Charles, i. 136. Sir Richard 136, 241
  ―――― of Trelowarren, i. 65, 148, 237. Jane 357. Sir Richard 211,
    357, 391.――Hannibal, Sir Francis, Sir Richard and Sir Vyell, all
    successively governors of St. Mawe’s castle, Sir Richard displaced
    from the government by Cromwell, ii. 277.――Ann, born in the Tower,
    iii. 136. Barbara 342. Carew 136. Sir Carew 337. Charles 135.
    Francis, built the house at Trelowarren 134. Sir Francis 314 _bis_,
    315 _bis_. Hannibal 134. Harriet 337. John 342. Michael 134. Philip
    137, 337 _ter._ Richard 134 _ter._ Richard 136 _bis_. Sir Richard
    135 _ter._ Sir Richard, a cavalier 135. Sent to the Tower, had time
    to destroy his papers, afterwards M.P. for Cornwall 136. Sir Richard
    seized by Mr. Boscawen 217. Sir Richard 337. Sir Richard R. his
    election for Bristol 137. Vyel 136, 137, 337. Sir Vyell 134, 135.
    Sir Vyell and his daughter 446. Five Misses 135. Mr. pupil of Dr.
    Borlase 53. Mr. 133, 337. Rev. Mr. 97. Family 44, 134 _bis_, 135
    _bis_, 216, 250, 258. Arms 135.――Sir R. R., Rev. Vyal of Withiel
    _bis_, and family, iv. 163

  Wadder family, iv. 17
  Waddon, i. 167.――Family, iii. 255. Monuments to ibid.
  ―――― of Tonacombe in Morwinstow, memorials of in Kilkhampton church,
    ii. 347
  Wade, general, i. 56
  Wadebridge, i. 115, 351, 375. Account of 372, 376. Erection 373.
    Fund for repair 374
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 259
  ―――― parish, ii. 256――iii. 324――iv. 46
  Wadebrygge, iv. 255
  Wadham college, Oxford, ii. 377, 389――iii. 20, 251
  ―――― Joseph, iii. 20. William 116. Family, founders of Wadham
    college, Oxford 20
  ―――― of Merrifield, John, ii. 110 _bis_
  Wadland, William, iii. 176
  Wager, Admiral Sir Charles, iv. 21, 36. Bond gives his history 37
  ―――― ship, loss of, iii. 205
  Wakefield, battle of, iii. 294
  Walburge, St. daughter of St. Richard, iv. 126. Little recorded of
    127. Church dedicated at Chester to 125. At Bristol 127
  Walcot, Dr. John, memoir of, iii. 219. His verses on Lieutenant
    Boscawen 220
  Waldegrave, Hon. Edward, monument to, ii. 325
  Wales, i. 307, 330, 334, 373――ii. 127――iii. 277, 336 _bis_, 340,
    460.――St. German travelled through, ii. 65 _bis_. Tin and copper ore
    carried into to be separated 303
  ―――― Prince of, ii. 376, 408――iv. 12, 19, 62, 72.――David, i.
    339.――Frederick, i. 69――ii. 84.――Joan, Princess, iii. 27.――-His
    plume, iv. 71, 78
  ―――― North, i. 294
  ―――― North Nesta, Princess of, and Rosse, Prince of, i. 34
  Walesborough, Walesbreu, Walesbury, or Whalesborough, John, iii.
    116. Mark de 307. Thomas, Thomas 116. Family 115. Arms 116.――Family,
    iv. 39
  Walesbury, or Walesborough, or Whalesborough manor, iii. 307.
    Account of 115, 117
  Walfi, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Walker, Rev. S. M., i. 392.――Rev. James, ii. 85. Rev. Robert, vicar
    of St. Winnow 34――iv. 158 _bis_.――Rev. Robert, anecdote of, iii. 4
  ―――― of Exeter, i. 369――ii. 170
  ―――― of Lanlivery, Mr. ii. 34
  Waller, Sir William, the parliamentary general, ii. 343
  Wallingford castle, iii. 285――iv. 9, 17
  ―――― honour, iii. 44, 286――iv. 9, 17, 97, 127
  ―――― manor, ii. 89, 113
  Wallington, iii. 26
  Wallis, Rev. John, i. 96. Captain, R.N., 359――ii. 99. The discoverer
    of Otaheite 270. The circumnavigator 405. Betty, his only dau.,
    270.――Christopher, notice of, iii. 446. John, Captain Samuel, R.N.
    family, and their monuments 440
  Walocus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Walpole, i. 151. Sir Robert 265, 284. George Earl of Orford, his
    deed of entail, Robert Earl of Orford 313. Sir Robert 84,
    313.――George, Earl of Orford, iii. 230. Horace 117.――Family 254, and
    iv. 62
  Walsh, James, iv. 67
  Walsingham, St. Mary of, ii. 75
  Walter, Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 180 _bis_.――Mary, iii.
    337. Family 254
  Walton court, iii. 155
  Walveden of Walveden, Catherine and John, and Miss, iii. 357. Family
    357, 365
  ―――― manor, iii. 356
  Warbeck, Perkin, ii. 186 _bis_, 187 _bis_, 189, 190 _quint._――iii.
    433.――Saluted King of England, ii. 188. Takes sanctuary at Beauly,
    submits 190. Pardoned, afterwards escaped 191
  Warborough, iv. 125. The Editor thinks it resembles the Roman works
    in Dorsetshire 126
  Warbstow parish, iii. 275――iv. 59, 61 _quat._
  WARBSTOW parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, iv.
    124. Consolidated with Trenegles, patron, incumbent 125. By Tonkin
    and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, name, saint, Chester Cathedral
    dedicated to her, attached to Treneglos, incumbent, Warborough
    fortification, from which, says Whitaker, the name is derived ibid.
    By Editor, this part abounds in military antiquities ibid.
    Surprising how armies could have been provisioned, has seen this
    entrenchment, much larger than those in Cornwall generally, the
    saint’s history, and of her relation St. Boniface 126. He invented
    the letter W, a church dedicated to St. Walburga at Bristol,
    impropriator, patron, Fentrigan manor, Donneny manor, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 127
  Warburg, St. iv. 125
  Warburton, William, Bishop of Gloucester, ii. 265, 266.――Dr.
    William, iii. 67, 68 _quint._, 69
  Ward, Simon, brewer to King Arthur, i. 131.――Dr. Seth, Bishop of
    Exeter, consecrated Falmouth church, ii. 4
  Wardour castle, Wilts, iv. 106
  Ware’s History of Ireland, iv. 145. MSS. 147
  Warinus, ii. 427
  Warlegan parish, ii. 239. Warleggon 167, 168. Warliggan 89――iv. 48,
    49.――Warligon, iii. 260
  WARLEGGON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Trengove, and
    family, iv. 128. Their arms 129. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, etymology, value, patron, incumbent, manor ibid. By
    Editor, descent of the manor and patronage of the living, manor of
    Carborro, the church and tower injured by lightning, general
    carelessness in neglecting the simple security against lightning
    130. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 131
  Warlewast, Robert, iii. 456.――William, Bishop of Exeter, i. 27,
    95――ii. 87――iii. 456, 457, 458.――Founder of Launceston priory, ii.
    419, 428. His deed of gift to it 426. Buried at Plympton priory,
    suppressed St. Stephen’s collegiate church 419
  Warliggon manor, iv. 128. Account of 129
  Warne, Rev. Mr. i. 246, 250.――Lawsuit between two brothers, ii. 253.
    Lost the whole estate 254
  Warr, Joan, iii. 60
  Warren, Maria Lukey, i. 403. Thomas 10.――David, iii. 387. William 239
  ―――― a Roman fort, description of, iii. 365
  Warrick, Charles, his character, and anticipation of the machinery
    of steam-boats, iv. 91
  Warrington, i. 107
  Wars, French, of Edward 3rd, i. 85
  Warton, Thomas, ii. 266.――Mr. iv. 141
  ――――’s History of English Poetry, iv. 113
  Warwick castle, iv. 114
  Warwick, Earl of, i. 168――iii. 73.――Guy, iv. 111, 113.――Thomas, i.
    341.――Beauchamp, ii. 130. Richard Neville 38. Richard 182 _ter._
  Wash in Lincolnshire, iii. 10
  Wastrell downs, i. 239
  Water, high, time of, at various points, iii. 375
  Waterloo, battle, Sir Hussey Vivian shared the glories of, iv. 86
  ―――― bridge, built of Cornwall stone, iii. 63
  Watson, Bishop, iv. 45
  Waunford, Thomas de, iv. 13; or Waurnford family and coheir 16
  Wayne, William, iii. 426
  Wayte, William, i. 243. Arms 244
  ―――― of Lestwithiel, i. 243
  ―――― of Trewenethick, William, iii. 324 _bis_
  Webb, John, ii. 196
  Webber, Jonathan and arms, ii. 336.――Edy, iii. 387. Joseph 362.
    Thomas 181, 387
  Wedgewood, Josiah, and Mrs. iii. 34.――Mr. procured soap rock from
    Lammoran parish, ii. 360
  Wednock, St. iv. 53
  Week St. Mary, near Stratton, a tower at, iii. 363
  WEEK ST. MARY, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value,
    patron, land tax, iv. 131. Thomasine Bonaventure, her history,
    obscure birth, she falls in with a London merchant 132. Goes with
    him to London as his servant, afterwards marries him, and is early
    left a rich widow, her second marriage and widowhood 133. Marries
    thirdly, is Lady Mayoress, in her third widowhood lived piously and
    charitably, founded a chantry and school in this parish 134.
    Dissolved by Edward 6th, two fairs 135. By Editor, church
    conspicuous, tower nearly the most lofty in Cornwall, town large,
    etymology of Week, lines on _sweet saints_ ibid. Town called a
    borough, manor merged in that of Swannacot, manor of East Orchard
    Mauvais, Castle-hill, advowson, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 136
  Weekly Miscellany, i. 283
  Weights, stone, found in Castle Dinas, i. 228
  Well, medicinal, i. 160
  Wellington, Duke, iv. 86, 159
  Wells, insurgent advance to, i. 86. Proceed from 87.――See removed
    to, iv. 36
  Welscomb, Thomas, i. 290
  Welsh bards, iii. 431.――Jones’s Relics of, ii. 166
  ―――― people, i. 307
  ―――― princes, iii. 336
  ―――― stone coal, iv. 123
  ―――― tongue, i. 337
  ―――― victory over the Picts, ii. 65
  Wen, de, iii. 214
  ―――― St. parish, sheaf of, ii. 44
  Wena, St. Bishop of Winchester, iv. 137
  Wenap, St ii. 129, 132 _bis_
  WENAP parish. _See Gwenap_
  Wenca, i. 2
  Wendron church, iii. 447.――St. Wendron, ii. 136, 137――St. Wendrone,
    iv. 5
  WENDRON parish. _See Gwendron_
  ―――― parish, i. 261.――St. Wendron, ii. 160.――St. Wendrone, iii. 5
  ―――― St. vicarage, ii. 138
  Wendyn, Robert, i. 313
  Wenheder, i. 2
  Wenn, St. iv. 160
  ―――― church, i. 74――iii. 188
  ―――― parish, i. 115, 212.――iii. 391, 395――iv. 163
  WENN, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, the only
    parish in Cornwall with the prefix of saint in Domesday Book, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax, iv. 137.
    Tower and bells struck down by lightning, Tregury family, Michael,
    Archbishop of Dublin, his Latin epitaph, mistranslated by Hals,
    Lancorla barton 138. The dwelling of Mr. Hals, the manor of Lancorla
    and of Checkenock, Trewithan 139. Damelsa castle and house,
    Treganatha, fairs at 140. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, saint, a
    vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, manor of Borlase ibid. Family of
    Norman origin, disputed by Whitaker 141. By Editor, Great Skewish,
    Skewish family, one of them compiled the wars of Troy temp. Henry
    6th, Archbishop Tregury. Editor’s communication with Dean Dawson,
    the Archbishop’s tomb restored by Swift ibid. Engraving of the tomb
    142. Editor’s letter to the Gentleman’s Magazine with it, antiquity
    and vigour of that work, history of the Archbishop nearly lost,
    noticed by Lysons, successive possessors of the estate, tomb seen by
    a Cornish gentleman, application to the Dean 143. Records of the
    Dublin prelates, &c. lost, preservation of the tomb, Wood’s mention
    of the Archbishop as governor of the newly founded college of Caen
    144. Memoir of him from Ware’s History of Ireland 145. Said to have
    been taken prisoner at sea, doubted, certain persons excommunicated
    for laying violent hands on him, his death 146. Monument described,
    preserved, his will 147. Celebration of a jubilee at Rome, dreadful
    fatality from the crowds, Tregury ordered a fast of three days in
    his diocese, his works, documents respecting the restoration of his
    temporalities 148. Parish statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 151
  Wenna, i. 2.――A female saint, iv. 140
  Wennack, St. iii. 37
  Wennow, St. parish, i. 112.――St. Wenow, ii. 41――iv. 110
  Wensent, i. 2
  Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, iii. 152
  Werrington, i. 266.――Barton, iii. 283, 459 _quat._ Possessors of 460
  ―――― manor, iv. 64 _bis_
  ―――― parish, iii. 456, 459 _quat._, 460――iv. 152
  Werstanus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Wescombe, Robert, iii. 153
  Wesley, John, preached in Gwenap pit, ii. 133
  Wessy, St. ii. 412
  West, John, iii. 387. Colonel John 419
  ―――― of Redruth, Udy, ii. 239
  ―――― of England Architecture, iv. 16
  ―――― hundred, i. 112, 167, 174, 316――ii. 291, 394, 409――iii. 13, 118,
    245, 260, 291, 347――iv. 19, 23, 110, 111, 128, 129, 155, 184
  ―――― Indies, regular communication of Falmouth with, ii. 18. Mr.
    Knill’s mission to 266. Ship supposed to have made for when driven
    to the Cornish coast 268
  ―――― Looe, Mr. Daniell, M.P. for, ii. 318
  ―――― Saxon Kings, iii. 139
  ―――― Saxons, Kingill, King of, ii. 284.――St. Richard, King of, iv. 126
  ―――― North, account of, i. 319
  Westbury of Winston Westbury, Edward, i. 400
  Westcot, iii. 163
  ―――― down, iv. 18
  Western circuit, ii. 227. Lawyers of 53
  ―――― lighthouse, its latitude and longitude, ii. 359
  Westlake of Elmsworthy, ii. 347. The last of the family died in
    destitution, twice pricked for Sheriff while in the poorhouse 347.
    Memorials in Kilkhampton church ibid.
  Westmacott, the sculptor, iii. 229
  Westminster, i. 345――ii. 403――iii. 242
  ―――― abbey, i. 170――iii. 65, 167.――Monuments in, iv. 38
  ―――― abbot of, ii. 149
  ―――― hall, ii. 190, 191, 192――iii. 131. The Bishops tried in 296
  ―――― school, iii. 296, 300
  ―――― statute, ii. 4
  Weston, William, English prior of the Knights of Malta, i.
    411.――Stephen, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 40. Judge 144.――Mr. and
    Bishop, iv. 118
  Wetherall, Sir Charles, ii. 162
  Weymouth, sea fight near, ii. 26
  Whaddon, i. 104
  Whalesborough family, iv. 114. _See Walesborough_
  Wharton’s History of English Poetry, i. 342
  ――――’s London, i. 251
  Wheal tower mine, ii. 33
  Wheare, Degory, his history and works, ii. 233
  Whele, Alfred, i. 143――iii. 345
  ―――― Etherson, i. 414
  ―――― Fortune, ii. 83, 219――Copper, iii. 47
  ―――― Reath, tin, account of, iii. 113
  ―――― Treliston, ii. 143
  ―――― Vor, i. 127, 128――iii. 13, 447
  Wherry mine, account of, iii. 99
  Whetstone, iv. 54
  Whetton, Samuel, i. 112
  Whichcott, Colonel Christopher, commissioner for the parliament
    army, iv. 189
  Whigs were joined by George I. and George II. the battle of Culloden
    caused their fall, ii. 244
  Whitaker, Rev. John, i. 96.――Some particulars of his Life, rector of
    Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 406. His literary character 407.――His history
    of Cornwall, ii. 123, 127, 143, 153, 199, 231, 240, 254 _bis_, 255,
    273, 274――iii. 278, 292, 302, 321, 348, 363, 364 _ter._, 365, 366,
    398 _bis_, 399. His style, &c., 342.――His remarks upon Truro castle
    and town, iv. 78. General remarks at the end of the work 167.――Mr.
    i. 73
  Whitaker’s cathedrals of Cornwall, i. 299
  Whitchurch, Ranulph de, iv. 16
  White, i. 266.――John and Robert, ii. 300. Rev. Mr. 151.――Thomas,
    Bishop of Peterborough, one of the seven, iii. 299
  White’s “Natural History of Selborne,” iii. 206
  White Friars, house at Truro, iv. 76, 79
  ―――― works mine, ii. 302
  Whitechapel, iii. 188
  Whitechurch parish, near Tavistock, iii. 390
  Whiteford barton, iv. 9, 11. Purchased by Mr. Call 10
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of Lestwithiel, iii. 24
  Whitehall, iii. 143
  Whiteleigh of Efford, John, i. 313, and Richard 313 _bis_.――Richard,
    ii. 43, 109, 189. Whitleigh of Efford 419. Joanna, Margaret, and
    Richard, ib.
  Whitford, Rev. Mr. of Poundstock, iii. 352
  Whiting, Rev. William, of St. Martin’s in Meneage, iii. 126
  Whitminster family and heir, iv. 16
  Whitmore, Mr. iii. 90
  Whitsand, or Whitsend bay, iii. 310, 433, 435.――Excavation at, ii. 252
  Whitstone parish, i. 133――iii. 86――iv. 39, 40
  WHITSTONE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, barton of Bennet, iv. 152. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, etymology, ib. A rectory, value, patron,
    incumbent, manor, name of the parish derived from it, Whitaker
    153. By Editor, church and tower fine and well seated, monuments,
    patron, and incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 154
  Whitsuntide, iii. 427.――Celebrated at Wilton by Canute, iv. 96
  Whittington, i. 121, 262.――Blanche, John and Thomas, iii. 317.
    William 316, 317 _bis_
  Wickliffe, iii. 163.――John, i. 314
  Widemouth, west, manor, iii. 353
  Widislade, ii. 427
  Wiedbury, ii. 292
  Wight, Isle of, a battle off, ii. 342
  Wike St. Mary, parish, i. 296――iv. 40, 59, 152 _bis_
  Wilgress, Rev. J. T. ii. 144
  Wilkes, John, i. 173.――Mr. ii. 245
  Wilkin, John, ii. 189
  Wilkins, Rev. Mr. ii. 372
  Wilkinson, William, ii. 189
  William, Rev. Anthony, rector of St. Keverne, rendered insensible by
    a storm during divine service, ii. 324. Sends an account of it to
    the Royal Society, ib.
  ―――― son of the Earl of Morton, ii. 211
  ―――― the Conqueror, i. 43, 241, 367――ii. 89, 118, 130, 147, 175, 176
    _bis_, 210, 211 _ter._, 235, 237, 238, 259, 310, 344, 379, 384, 399,
    418――iii. 22, 44, 46, 114, 129, 134, 142, 276, 291, 346, 349, 352,
    422, 451 _bis_, 456. Charter of 114, 117――iv. 14, 15, 62, 67, 102,
    118, 153
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 50, 51, 59, 62, 80, 92, 94, 106, 129, 145, 155,
    175, 253, 257, 259, 273, 299, 315, 332, 335――iii. 64, 74, 79, 101,
    114, 115, 118, 139, 391――iv. 184
  ―――― Rufus, ii. 147, 211 _bis_, 344――iii. 462――iv. 140
  ―――― 3rd, i. 46――ii. 51, 54, 76, 89, 112, 127, 255, 277, 278,
    301――iii. 15, 78, 148, 168, 176, 182, 186, 195, 199, 208, 222, 237,
    297 _bis_, 417, 421――iv. 22, 107, 116 _ter._, 152, 160
  ―――― and Mary, ii. 236
  ―――― 4th, King, iv. 18
  ―――― Duke of Normandy, iii. 462
  ―――― of Malmesbury, i. 200――iv. 96
  Williams, i. 16, 158, 210, 387. Edward 272, 276. Rev. Humphrey 355.
    Jane 357. John 154, 277.――John, ii. 134. Richard 256. Mr. 157.
    Family 336.――Rev. Anthony of St. Kevern, iii. 88. Courtenay 367.
    John 350. Thos. of Lombard Street, London 162. Three Misses 343. Mr.
    82, 363. Family 343, 363.――John, iv. 55. Mr. 74. Henry 77
  ―――― of Bodenick, or Boderick, William, i. 319.――William, ii. 410, 411
  ―――― of Carmanton, John, i. 225.――(or Willyams) of Carnanton, Anne,
    iii. 229. Humphrey 151. John 229
  ―――― of Carvean, Catherine, John, iii. 355. Mary 355, 362. Arms 355
  ―――― of Dorset or Wilts, arms, iii. 145
  ―――― of Helston, John, i. 357
  ―――― of Herringston in Dorset, Mr. family, and arms, iii. 356
  ―――― of Probus, i. 396――ii. 54
  ―――― of Rosworthy, John, and arms, iii. 145
  ―――― of St. Blazey, Hugh, his marriages, and death, i. 53. Building
    a new house 54. Arms 53
  ―――― of Tregenna, John, i. 420
  ―――― of Trehane, i. 400.――Mary and Mr. iii. 366
  ―――― of Trevorva, arms, iii. 355
  ―――― of Trewithan, Richard, i. 53, 225.――Courtenay, iii. 356
  ―――― of Trewithgy, William, iii. 355
  ―――― of Truthan, i. 398 _bis_. John 396, 398. Arms 396
  Willington family, iii. 348
  Willis, Andrew, killed at Skewis, i. 276 _bis_
  ―――― Browne, ii. 200――iii. 120, 268, 459.――His additions to Camden,
    i. 257, 339. Notitia Parliamentaria 200――ii. 68, 403――iii. 14, 16,
    17, 24, 25, 26, 27――iv. 117.――Account of St. German’s priory, ii.
    69, 71, 72. Of Launceston 422, 423
  ―――― of Fen Ditton, Bart. Sir Thomas and Sir William, ii. 97
  ―――― of London, Dorothy and Thomas, ii. 97
  Willoughby, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186. Family 313
  ―――― de Broke, Lord, ii. 231.――Family, iii. 47
  Wills, Rev. Mr. i. 383.――Anthony offers himself and six sons to King
    William 3rd, ii. 112. Rev. Thomas 139 _bis_. Rev. Thomas, vicar of
    Wendron 326.――Rev. Mr. of Mullion, iii. 257
  Wills of Helston, Matthew, ii. 139, 326
  ―――― of Wivelscomb, iii. 269
  Willyams of Cannerton, Anne, John, John and Oliver, ii. 85
  Wilow, St. ii. 411.――By Leland, iv. 279
  Wilson’s Martyrology, iii. 385
  Wilton, Canute celebrated Whitsuntide at, iv. 96
  ―――― abbey, Wilts, iii. 291.――St. Udith, abbess of, iv. 93. Built
    St. Denis church at, and was buried there 94.――Priors of, ii. 291
  ―――― convent at, iv. 96
  ―――― of Dunveth, Miss, John, iv. 3
  Wiltshire, i. 334
  ―――― William Lord Scrope, Earl of, Lord treasurer, iii. 129
  Wimbourn Minster, iv. 126
  Winchelsea, its naval armaments defeated Fowey, ii. 45
  Winchester, i. 326, 327, 336――ii. 139.――Rebels march through, i. 87
  ―――― Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of, ii. 194.――Jonathan Trelawney, iii.
    295,  297
  ―――― Levignus, monk of, ii. 60
  ―――― measure, iii. 182
  Windham, Madam, iii. 449. Mr. 449 _ter._
  Windsor, i. 146 _bis_
  ―――― collegiate church, i. 341
  ―――― dean and chapter of, ii. 72
  ―――― poor knights of, ii. 52, 54, 55
  ―――― Gerald de, i. 34. Otho de 34 _bis_. Walter de 34. William de
    34, 35
  ―――― Lord, i. 34
  Winenton in Kerrier, iii. 133
  Winfred, St. iv. 126
  Wingfield, Miss, i. 266――ii. 243.――Family, iv. 156
  Winnocus, St. and his history, iv. 157
  Winnous, St. by Leland, iv. 278
  Winnow manor, ii. 252
  ―――― St. downs, iv. 29, 186 _bis_, 188
  ―――― St. parish, i. 113, 421, 358, 376, 379, 390――iii. 24――iv. 111,
    184.――Rev. Robert Walker, vicar of, ii. 34
  WINNOW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint’s name,
    ancient name, value of benefice, incumbent, land tax, St. Nectan’s
    chapel. History of the saint, his chapel at Hartland, built by
    Goditha, daughter of Earl Godwin, the Earl attributing his
    preservation in a tempest at sea to the saint’s intercession, iv.
    155. Barton and manor of St. Winow, its possessors 156. Tethe,
    Trevego, Laran bridge 157. By Tonkin, saint, his history, Bergh St.
    Winnox, benefice, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation ibid. By Editor, beautiful situation of the church,
    vicarage house and glebe, Mr. Walker, chapel, Ethy, notice of
    Admiral Penrose 158. Statistics, the vicars, value of the benefice,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 159
  Winnow, St. vicarage, beauty of, iv. 158
  Winock, St. abbey, at Bergh in Flanders, iii. 33
  Winotus, St. iv. 155
  Winow, St. barton and manor, iv. 156
  Winslade, i. 7
  ―――― of Tregarrick, or St. Agnes, William, ii. 192
  Winsloe, Mr. ii. 399
  Winslow, Rev. R. of Minster, iii. 236 _bis_. Thomas, took the name
    of Phillips 235
  Winstanley of Littlebury, Essex, built the first lighthouse at
    Eddystone, iii. 376 _ter._
  Winter of Sydney, Sir John, i. 398
  ―――― of Kellyfreth, ii. 304. Arms, ib.
  ―――― an eminent family of Gloucestershire, ii. 304
  Winwaloe, St. iv. 60
  Winwallo, St. ii. 127. His history 127, 128 _ter._
  Winwolaus of Tremene chapel, iv. 60
  Wise, i. 370
  ―――― of Stoke Damarel, i. 266
  Witchalse, Benet and his daughter, iii. 199
  Withal rectory house, i. 75
  Withel parish, iii. 391, 395.――Withell, ii. 94, 335.――Withiel, i.
    115――ii. 384――iv. 137, 140
  Withell goose manor, iv. 160 _bis_
  Withering, Dr. ii. 331.――The botanist, iii. 173
  Witherington, Dr. i. 150
  Withiel church, i. 74
  ―――― parish, _see Withel_
  WITHIEL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, iv. 160.
    Rectory house built, Burnevas, Trenance, family, and arms, Bryn 161.
    Birth of Sir Bevill Grenville 162. By Tonkin, situation, value of
    benefice, appropriation, a rectory, value, incumbent ibid. By
    Editor, rectory house improved, Trewren monument, statistics,
    incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 163
  Withroe manor, ii. 252
  Withyel, Richard Trewren, rector of, i. 376
  Wivelsberge, advowson of, iii. 115
  Wodehouse, ii. 117. Lord, is the representative of the Killigrew
    family 23
  Wolf, the, iv. 173
  Wolfchild, Lady, mother of St. Udith, iv. 93
  Wolfe, General, iii. 218
  Wolfran, St. and his festival, iv. 117
  Wollacombe of Devon, Mr. iii. 222 _bis_
  Wollas, iii. 258
  Wolphard, abbot, iv. 126
  Wolpher, King of Mercia, iv. 125
  Wolridge, Thomas, iii. 374
  ―――― of Gorminick, John, i. 420
  Wolrige, Dr. Hugh, monument to, and John, iii. 454
  Wolsey, Cardinal, ii. 361――iii. 299 _bis_
  Wolsey’s survey, iii. 340
  Wolvedon, or Goulden, barton, in St. Probus and Tregony, iii. 359.
    Fort on 365
  ―――― of Golden, Charles or Christopher, i. 297
  Wolverston, i. 136
  ―――― of Wolverston, ii. 5
  Wood, i. 76, 210――ii. 215.――Anthony, iii. 251――iv. 144. His Annals
    144.――His Athenæ Oxonienses, ii. 233――iii. 296――iv. 86. His Fasti
    144.――William, ii. 353.――Rev. William, junior, iii. 450.――Rev.
    William of Withiel, iv. 162. Rev. Mr. of Treneglos 61. Rev. Mr. of
    Warbstow 125. Rev. Mr. of Withiel 160
  ―――― Knowle, iii. 117
  Woodberry, i. 168
  Woodland, Sir William, iii. 239
  ―――― street, i. 79
  Woodley, Rev. C. W. of Stithians, iv. 5
  Woodly village, ii. 385
  Woodvill, Lionel, Bishop of Salisbury, ii. 194. Richard Earl Rivers 194
  Woolcock, ii. 192.――J. H. iii. 387
  Woolcombe, Rev. Charles of Minster, iii. 236. Rev. William of
    Pillaton 347
  Woolcumbe, Mr. ii. 279
  ―――― of Longford hill, ii. 279
  Woolford village, iii. 255
  Woolley, J. T. i. 314, 315.――James, iii. 346. Mr. 163
  ―――― village, iii. 255
  Woolridge, Rector of St. Michael Penkivell, i. 256.――Rev. Mr. of
    Tywardreth, iv. 99
  ―――― of Carlynike, John, and arms, i. 256
  Woolrington, John de, i. 246
  Woolston, George, shot in Rogers’s affray, i. 274 _quat._, 275
    _ter._――Mr. iii. 366
  ―――― manor, iii. 353
  Worcester, St. Chad, patron of, ii. 391
  ―――― Florence of, iii. 310――iv. 168
  ―――― William of, ii. 203, 204, 206――iii. 223, 292, 350.――His
    Itinerary, Appendix 6, iv. 222 to 256. Containing his life 222.
    List of Cornish castles 228. Itinerary from Polston Brygge to
    Porthenys 229. List of the Scilly islands and of obits 230.
    Memoranda 231. List of rivers 233. Memoranda from Thomas Peperelle
    234. Extracts from the Bodman kalendar 236. Sources of the rivers,
    and a list of islands 237. Account of Bodman, and an extract from
    the Martyrology 238. From Bodman kalendar 239. From Bodman
    register respecting the plague, and memoranda from Robert Bracey
    240. Verses at Tavistock and extract from the Tavistock kalendar
    241. Property of Penryn college 242. Itinerary from North sea to
    the Thamar river 243. List of the havens 244. Itinerary from
    Penzance to Plymton 245. Memoranda from the kalendar of Mont
    Myghele, journey from Weare to Manchew 249. Various memoranda 250
    to 252. Dates of the above journey 252 to 255. Bridges in Cornwall
    from Exeter to St. Michael’s mount 255
  Worcester, William Worth, Archdeacon of, iii. 62
  ―――― William Lloyd, Bishop of, iii. 299
  ―――― college, Oxford, ii. 233
  Worcestershire, ii. 147――iii. 344
  Woronus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Worsley, Rev. Charles, rector of Leskeard, iii. 23
  Worth, i. 240.――Mr. ii. 97.――John, iii. 60, 62 _bis_. Built a house
    at Tremogh 62. Family and marriage of the heiress ibid.
  ―――― of Penryn, John son of John, William, and William, D.D. iii. 62
  ―――― of Worth, family and arms, iii. 60
  Wortha, Higher, iii. 258
  ―――― Lower, iii. 258
  Worthyvale manor, iii. 234 _bis_, 236. King Arthur received his
    death wound at 236
  Wotton, account of, ii. 362. The barton of Trelugan manor 363
  ―――― cross village, ii. 362
  Wray, William, iii. 358
  Wrey, Elizabeth and Sir William, i. 210.――Rev. H. B. ii. 416.――Sir
    William, iii. 16.――Sir Bourchier, iv. 112. Rev. W. B. 50. Family 110
    _bis_. Of Devon 50
  ―――― of Trebigh, Sir Bourchier, Sir Chichester John _bis_, William
    _bis_, and arms, i. 411
  Wright, ii. 130, 253, 375
  Wring Cheese, i. 178, 179. Described 184, 190
  Wringworthy, Higher, iii. 246
  ―――― manor, iii. 252
  Wroughton, Miss, ii. 218
  Wulrington, ii. 430
  Wulvedon, by Leland, iv. 272
  Wykeham, William of, iii. 171
  Wyllacombe, iv. 29
  Wylliams of Roseworthy in Gwyniar, Ann, iii. 159. Rev. Cooper 159,
    160. Rector of Kingston near Canterbury, his works 160. Humphrey
    James and James 159. John 159 _bis_, 160. John and John 159. John O.
    159 _bis_. An anecdote he told 160. Thomas Captain 159
  Wymer, St. ii. 142
  Wymond, Mr. i. 78.――Family and coheirs, iv. 113
  Wymondesham, W. de, iv. 44
  Wymondeston, W. de, iv. 46
  Wymondham, William de, i. 383
  Wymp, i. 2
  Wynn, Right Hon. Charles Williams, M.P. ii. 20
  Wynnanton, ii. 126, 128
  Wynne, i. 163, 400, 401. Rev. Dr. Luttrell 164, 401 _ter._, 402
    _ter._, 403.――Rev. Dr. ii. 114
  Wynnenton, i. 241
  Wynnock, St. parish, ii. 358
  Wyse, William, iv. 147

  Xantus, Prince of Caretica, i. 300
  Xenophon, translations from, ii. 76
  Xysten, St. i. 88

  Yealm bridge, iii. 283
  Yeard, Richard, i. 210
  Yellow Leigh manor, ii. 416
  Yeo family, ii. 86, 416.――Arms 87
  ―――― of Trevelver family, iii. 240
  Yescombe, E. B. monument to, iii. 229
  York, i. 397――ii. 213
  ―――― Archbishop of, i. 139――ii. 90.――St. Paulinus the first, iii.
    284, 285
  ―――― county, i. 258――ii. 76――iv. 42.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10
  ―――― diocese, iv. 42
  ―――― Duke of, ii. 94. James 27. His engagement with the Dutch fleet,
    and letter of thanks to Captain Penrose 28.――Richard, i. 168, 169
    _ter._――ii. 260
  ―――― William, ii. 189
  ―――― house of, i. 169――ii. 108, 185, 186 _bis_, 187
  ―――― street, near Covent Garden, iii. 252
  ―――― and Lancaster wars, iii. 199
  Yorke of Somersetshire, Humphrey settled at Trevassack, Richard of
    Wellington, Sarah, and family, iii. 342
  Young, Rev. Denis, iii. 256
  Yse, i. 2

  Zamkees the Samothracian, i. 24
  Zealand, iii. 227
  Zela, i. 20
  ZENNAR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, founder and
    impropriator, soil, tin, Chapel Jane, iv. 164. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, name, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent
    ibid. By Editor, beauty of the scenery, fertile, church and tower,
    bells inscribed, no saint to be found, feast, St. John Lateran
    church at Rome, Trereen Dinas, or the Gurnet’s head 165. Editor
    purchased it for its geological interest, impropriation,
    statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 166
  Zennor parish, i. 132――iii. 242――iv. 52, 53, 54
  Zouch, Lord, i. 170――John Lord, iii. 102




ERRATA.


VOLUME II.

  P. 7, line 20, _for_ Poble, _read_ Poole.
  P. 90, line 5 from foot, _for_ pale, _read_ pall.
  P. 123, line 13 from foot, _for_ Pennerks, _read_ Pennecks.
  P. 151, line 5 from foot, _for_ Tress, _read_ Trese.
  P. 203, line 2 from foot, _for_ exepecierint, _read_ expedierint.
  P. 213, line 5 from foot, _for_ Appeninnes, _read_ Apennines.
  P. 215, line 12 from foot, _after_ western, _read_ limit of.
  P. 224, last word, _add_ baptismal name;
          and in first line of p. 225, _after_ Cornwall, _add_ and.
  P. 240, lines 2 from foot; and in p. 241, _for_ Angowe, _read_ Angove.
  P. 250, lines 9 and 11 from foot, _for_ Perth, _read_ Porth.
  P. 282, line 2, _for_ Morsa, _read_ Morva.
  P. 283, line 13, _for_ Leucan and St. Lennan,
                   _read_ Levan and St. Sennan.
  P. 290, line 6 and 7 from foot, _for_ Juest and Jeast,
                                  _read_ Tuest _and_ Teast.
  P. 313, line 2, _for_ Bavi, _read_ Bari.
  P. 319, line 9, _for_ seers, _read_ peers.
  P. 339, line 19, _for_ Glanville, _read_ Grenville.




END OF VOLUME II.




J. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT STREET.




Transcriber’s Note:

This book was written in a period when many words and names had not
become standardized in their spelling. Words may have multiple
spelling variations or inconsistent hyphenation in the text. These
have been left unchanged. Dialect, obsolete and alternative spellings
were left unchanged, as were misspelled words, incorrect use of
homonyms, and sentences without verbs. Words and phrases in italics
are surrounded by underscores, _like this_. Superscripted characters
are preceded by a carat, e.g. Gen^l. The book used hyphens, dots, and
spaces of various lengths to indicate unknown names, dates or words.
For consistency, these were changed to four dashes: ――――. Insular
letters were replaced with contemporary equivalents.

Obvious printing errors, such as backwards, upside down, missing or
partially printed letters, were corrected. Unprinted punctuation and
final stops missing at the end of abbreviations and sentences were
added. Duplicated words were removed, as were duplicate letters after
rejoining words that were hyphenated at the end of a line.

Footnotes were numbered in order and moved to the end of the chapter
in which the related anchors occur.

Noted, not changed:

  ――Total population of Gwendron in 1821 does not equal the sum of
    items in the table.
  ――In the chapter of St. Hilary, the phrase “some bearing his name,
    and others the signature of Vatum Ultimus, alluding to his which
    is not uncommon in Cornwall,” occurs over a page turn and may have
    omitted text.
  ――In the table for Kea, the line, “In 1821 and in 1831 the population
    of Tregavethen is subjoined, 66―59.” may belong in the later chapter
    of Kenwyn.
  ――The 90 percent decrease of population is not correct for the numbers
    given in the table for St. Just, in Roseland.

The book contains the following pen and ink changes made by an unknown
hand. The changes were not made to the text, but are indicated below
in parentheses:

  ―― jurisdiction of Abbey one (Tone),
  ―― the good lines (livers) in Gulval parish
  ―― Cavnon (Carnon) Adit was either
  ―― John Willyams, of Cannerton (Carnanton), near
  ―― Leman (Lemon) commenced the modern
  ―― by rock (rack) and chain
  ―― died of the small-pox in 1789 (1739),
  ―― re-established with much less effect (effort),
  ―― A caution (custom) had existed (line 9417)
  ―― church and town (tower) of Llanlivery are very conspicuous

The list of errata, placed at the end of the book, appears only in
Volume 1. The Index appears only at the end of Volume 4. Both were
added as a convenience to readers.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Parochial History of Cornwall,
Volume 2 (of 4), by Davies Gilbert

